



Global Chip Industry Readies for a Future Beyond Moore's Law - Vox

























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Global Chip Industry Readies for a Future Beyond Moore's Law

After 50 years, a fundamental assumption about the march of progress in computing is evolving into something new.


    
      By
      
Arik Hesseldahl



  Feb 15, 2016,  1:50pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Global Chip Industry Readies for a Future Beyond Moore's Law












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Screenshot from the Chemical Heritage Foundation



It hasn’t even been a year since the world’s technology elite paused to observe the 50th anniversary of Moore’s Law, and the long knives are already out in force to deny it a 51st.
Next month the global semiconductor industry will release its latest biennial assessment of the technological road ahead for making computer chips. As reported by the journal Nature, for the first time, the look ahead will be crafted without the key assumption of the “law,” central in all previous reports: That chipmaking technology will improve sufficiently that companies at the forefront of the business will be able to shrink the size of transistors every two years or so at a more-or-less predictable pace.
The new forecast, called the International Roadmap for Devices and Systems, is an evolution of what has since 1998 been called the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors. For the first time, its outlook will be based less on the view that applications will inevitably follow improvements in raw computing speed and power, but instead that chip advances will be developed with applications in mind: Smartphones, wearable devices and machines running in data centers and so on. Moore’s Law will no longer be considered central to the roadmap.
Moore’s Law isn’t really a law of science, but rather an informal observation made about the apparent progress of what was in 1965 a very young chip industry. That year Gordon Moore — who later co-founded Intel — wrote up his thoughts in a paper for the April 1965 edition of Electronics Magazine. He proved remarkably prescient, suggesting that by 1975 a single chip could contain a then-unimaginable 75,000 transistors. The transistor counts of today’s mainstream chips number in the billions.
Practically every form of computing and electronics has derived a direct benefit from the unremitting efforts of semiconductor engineers who have repeatedly scaled seemingly impassable barriers in the electrical and materials sciences. The advances have had a monumental long-term effect on society’s ability to process information and to make it faster and easier to access: Every new generation of chip is smaller than and at least as powerful a computing engine as the one that came before it, but less expensive to make.
Until now, practically every time doubting wags, including myself, have argued that the time had come for Moore and his law to ride off into the sunset, the engineers in bunny suits have figured out new ways to maintain control of the electrons flowing on a chip.
This time is different. As I argued in an essay for Re/code last year, the chip industry is running up against some truly fundamental limits that are causing a lot of people who know a lot more about this than I do to conclude that the time has come to reconsider how we think about improvements in computing.
It comes down to this: You can only shrink a chip so much before the physics fails.
The most advanced chip currently turned out by Intel is built on a 14-nanometer process technology. A nanometer is a billionth a meter, and the period at the end of this sentence, were it printed on paper, would be about one million nanometers. At 14 nanometers, the individual parts that make up that chip are smaller than a typical virus particle and similar in size to the outer cell wall of an individual germ. It has gotten so expensive and complicated to manufacture at this scale that only four companies are considered to be on today’s leading edge, down from 18 a decade ago: Intel, Samsung, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Corp. and GlobalFoundries.
The next logical steps in the semiconductor roadmap take us to 10 nanometers, which, depending on whom you ask, may appear in commercial chips this year. Beyond that lies seven nanometers — due about 2018 or 2019. Intel can see ahead about that far. TSMC says it will reach seven nanometers sometime next year and is now working to get to five.
Generally speaking it’s at the five-nanometer juncture — due maybe in 2021, give or take — that the outlook has tended to get incomprehensibly fuzzy. At that size, elements on the chip would be about twice the size of a strand of DNA.
Smaller than that, the design features on a chip become no bigger than 10 individual atoms. At that scale, electrons start to behave unreliably: The laws of classical physics give way to the infamously uncertain rules of the quantum scale. Remember Heisenberg (and I don’t mean the one from “Breaking Bad”)? This is his territory. You might be able to make chips at that size, but there’s no guarantee they’d work.
So what’s it all mean? Potentially a much more complex view of the progress of chip technology as we head into the future. As Daniel Reed, a computer scientist at the University of Iowa who was quoted in the Nature essay, says, today’s Boeing 787 doesn’t fly much faster than a Boeing 707 did in the 1970s, but a lot of other innovation has come in aircraft since then, including improved fuel efficiency, lighter airframes and electronic navigation systems.
The road ahead will diverge from one into many with different destinations and different milestones along the way. Some indeed may lead nowhere, but others will lead into unexpected territory that we haven’t foreseen. I don’t know about you, but to me that seems kind of cool.
This article originally appeared on Recode.net.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Technology















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













