



Crocs spring 2019 collection: Crocs is targeting cool teens now - Vox

























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Crocs is now targeting teens. Somehow, it’s working.

There’s even a nickname for the Gen Z customer: the “explorer.”


    
      By
      
Rebecca Jennings@rebexxxxa


            
                Updated
            
            
  Nov  1, 2018, 10:08am EDT









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Crocs is now targeting teens. Somehow, it’s working.












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















A (presumably) cool young person wearing cool-young-person Crocs.
@Crocs/Instagram






Rebecca Jennings
        is a senior correspondent covering social platforms, influencers, and the creator economy. She has reported on TikTok since its introduction to the US in 2018.
      




Right now on the hypebeast resale site Grailed, a pair of Crocs is going for $500. To be fair, they are not the normal kind of Crocs that you can find at, like, J.C. Penney; they’re from the brand’s collaboration with the streetwear brand Alife from earlier this summer. Still, it’s a lot of money for a squishy orthopedic shoe that Time magazine once included in a slideshow of the 50 worst inventions.
But it’s not all that surprising, given that Crocs have been a kooky side note in high fashion for a few years. Crocs regularly clomp down runways at fashion week; there are heel versions and fur versions and platform versions that cost $850 and sold out before they even went on sale. 

      




  View this post on Instagram

 
   

  

   

   
A post shared by Crocs Shoes (@crocs) on Sep 24, 2018 at 4:09pm PDT



Yet most of that industry clout has been due to its collaborations, like the ones with streetwear brands such as Alife or established houses like Balenciaga, in which the Platonic ideal of the classic Croc is reimagined by a high-profile creative director. And the rest of it overlaps with the fact that, somehow, hideous sandals in general are in vogue. 
Crocs themselves aren’t responsible for the confounding relevance of footwear like Birkenstocks and Tevas over the past five-plus years. The Crocs we know today have been around for more than a decade; their existence just happened to overlap with the fact that suddenly, their particular brand of ugly is on trend.
And with its new collection, Crocs is actively chasing the customer who probably already owns an ironic pair (or a few). Brand employees told me they even have a special name for him (he’s a dude): the “explorer,” the hypebeast-adjacent Gen Zer who stores his Crocs next to his Yeezys. In an even more blatant teen-targeting move, on November 1, the brand announced a collab with rapper Post Malone. 
“We know this group is all about self-expression, which is why our spring 2019 collection features a bright, bold color palette, positive messaging, oversized logos and trend-right platform silhouettes,” explained Michelle Poole, senior vice president and chief product and merchandising officer of Crocs.
 









A slide from Crocs’ spring 2019 collection.
Crocs



Alongside the brand’s standard fare of flexible sandals, bedazzle-able clogs in a rainbow of shades, and dad-approved water shoes, the Crocs collection preview on October 30 featured certain styles that wouldn’t have looked out of place at, say, an Adidas store. There were minimalist slip-ons in sleek black-and-white combinations, a sneaker that looked almost like Allbirds but with techier fabric, and a rubbery slide with a millennial pink upper and a translucent red flatform. They’re shoes that pair well with current fashion: casual, streetwear-influenced clothing that’s relatively unflashy. 
The move is similar to what pretty much every other brand is doing, with the hope of attracting devoted customers that will be around for a long time (and especially when they start holding jobs with disposable incomes). Kodak, a camera company in an era when people already have cameras on their phones, is targeting teens obsessed with old-school analog technology with its collaboration with Forever 21. Formerly struggling fashion brands like Abercrombie and Delia’s have attempted rebrands to capture fresh Gen Z consumers who don’t remember when they were trendy the first time around. 
 









Post Malone in the Post Malone x Crocs collab shoes. 
Courtesy of Crocs



And Crocs’ courting of the cool teen appears to be working. In a recent survey conducted by the investment firm Piper Jaffray of about 8,600 teenagers, Crocs was ranked 13th in the “top footwear brand” category, up from 27th last year. It’s a statistic that’s clearly influenced by the larger trend of ugly shoes as status symbols, and of ironic fashion in general (which also explains the rise of brands like Vetements and Off-White). 
Even though most teens can’t afford to drop multiple hundreds on the versions peddled by other brands, they’re probably a lot more likely to spring for Crocs’ regular ol’ $30 to $40 versions. People are even creating their own imaginary brand collabs on places like YouTube, which has dozens of videos of people DIYing their concepts of Crocs by Supreme, Off-White, and Gucci. 
Sales of Crocs may be down from their 2014 high, but focusing on the cool-young-person market could help. And Crocs appears to be leaning in: “Our ‘explorer’ consumers play an important role in shaping our global product and marketing strategies,” added Poole. 
It’s hard to say how long ugly shoes will be cool — fashion is a pendulum, and trends tend to arrive as a backlash to whatever came before — but as long as teens are buying Crocs, it seems that Crocs will be giving them what they want. 



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        The Goods (old, do not use)















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













