



The game theory behind Mitch McConnell's Supreme Court strategy - Vox




























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











The game theory behind Mitch McConnell's Supreme Court strategy



    
      By
      
John Patty and Tom Clark



  Feb 23, 2016,  2:10pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
The game theory behind Mitch McConnell's Supreme Court strategy












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.
Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images




This story is part of a group of stories called 





    This post is part of Mischiefs of Faction, an independent political science blog featuring reflections on the party system.
  


In the immediate wake of Justice Scalia's death, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell very quickly announced that President Obama should not name Scalia's successor. A great deal of attention has been paid (including by the Onion) to the political posturing that has taken place in the hours and days since.
Understandably, much of it focuses on what kind of nominee might actually be nominated and whether such a nominee would actually be confirmed. We're going to take a different tack and consider why McConnell so quickly tried to preempt a nominee in the first place.
There's no harm in looking, right?
Formally, it is very easy for McConnell and his Republican colleagues to ensure that no Obama nominee would be confirmed (though the Democrats could make life difficult). Given this, then standard "gatekeeping'' logic (see here) implies that the GOP can only gain from at least seeing whom Obama would nominate: If Obama nominates an unacceptable nominee, the GOP senators can simply say no to whomever Obama nominates.
Furthermore, withstanding the pressure to vote on an Obama nominee could help GOP incumbents signal their commitment to the conservative principles, such as gun rights, that Scalia stood for on the Court. This logic is laid out by one of us in "Signaling Through Obstruction" (ungated version). 
The fear of being seen as extreme
However, from a strategic standpoint, McConnell might fear that 14 or more of his colleagues would not be willing to obstruct a moderate and well-qualified nominee. In fact, some senators might actually be willing to vote for a relatively liberal nominee because they fear being perceived as too conservative by moderate voters. This logic lies at the heart of the reaction described by Tim Groseclose and Nolan McCarty.
The possibility of incumbents fearing the blame game is unusually important for McConnell this year because the GOP has 24 Senate incumbents up for reelection this year, and of the 12 competitive Senate races this year, 10 are for seats currently held by Republicans.
Naturally, most of those competitive seats are in states where the electorate is relatively more moderate — places like Illinois (Mark Kirk), Missouri (Roy Blunt), North Carolina (Richard Burr), New Hampshire (Kelly Ayotte), and Ohio (Rob Portman). Such incumbents might worry that obstruction would be too costly in terms of alienating independent voters in the general election. Indeed, see Kirk's op-ed from Monday, in which he wrote:

I recognize the right of the president, be it Republican or Democrat, to place before the Senate a nominee for the Supreme Court and I fully expect and look forward to President Barack Obama advancing a nominee for the Senate to consider.

The devil's in the details
Putting the "Signaling Through Obstruction" and "Blame Game" logics together creates a rich set of scenarios for McConnell, who is undoubtedly uncertain not only about how the electoral environments facing his 24 colleagues will unfold, but also about how these colleagues will behave as the election progresses. Accordingly, he may have a strong incentive to avoid forcing his colleagues to go "on the record" with either a vote on a Supreme Court nominee, or with being seen as complicit in obstructing one, particularly one who will likely be widely perceived as extremely qualified and politically moderate.
After all, if there is no nominee to vote for or obstruct, voters cannot infer much, if anything, about their incumbents' stances from their actions. As has been well documented by political science research (see here and here for examples), senators are sensitive to opinion among their political base when voting on Supreme Court nominees. At the same time, well-qualified, moderate nominees tend to be broadly politically popular.
In other words, the problem for McConnell is that if President Obama selects a well-qualified, politically moderate nominee, Republicans will have to decide whether to go on the record voting against the nominee, revealing themselves to be ideological extremists, or to support a political moderate, nominated by President Obama, potentially upsetting their political bases. In the context of a competitive election, the choice is then between the base and independents, both of which are necessary to win reelection in closely divided states.
In line with all of this, and as one of us has pointed out in another post, there may be a strong interest among Democrats in keeping the nomination debate going as part of the election, whereas Republicans might have a distinct interest in ending the discussion (or at least hiding it from public discussion until after the election).
Weighing 34 Senate races against one presidential election
Many have speculated that McConnell's reluctance is due to his hope that a future Republican president might nominate Justice Scalia's replacement. However, our logic suggests a different rationale. Given President Obama's relatively constrained political capital and the GOP's control of the Senate, this seems like a good opportunity for the Republicans to press Obama for a moderate nominee. However, that might be exactly what McConnell fears!
McConnell's desire to preempt any Obama nominee is motivated by the fear that, when confronted by a nominee, his GOP colleagues will confront a Catch-22 in which, regardless of what they say or do, the GOP's prospects for maintaining control of the Senate in 2017 will be worsened. Scalia's passing rocked the political scene, and left Mitch McConnell in a very hard place indeed.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        The Latest















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













