



Some victims stayed friends with Harvey Weinstein. I did the same with my rapist. Here’s why. - Vox

























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Some victims stayed friends with Harvey Weinstein. I did the same with my rapist. Here’s why.

Rapists who are powerful in their field use favors and guilt to silence victims.


    
      By
      
Natalia Antonova



  Oct 13, 2017,  9:10am EDT









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Some victims stayed friends with Harvey Weinstein. I did the same with my rapist. Here’s why.












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Harvey Weinstein at the 2015 Tribeca Film Festival in New York City.
Ilya S. Savenok/Getty Images for the 2015 Tribeca Film Festival



“That’s it. That’s what they’ll bury her for,” was the first thing I thought. 
I was reading Ronan Farrow’s excellent New Yorker article on Harvey Weinstein’s alleged history of rape and sexual harassment, when I got to Weinstein’s alleged rape of actress Asia Argento. Argento claims that Weinstein performed oral sex on her, against her will, in a hotel room.
Argento goes on to say that she grew close to Weinstein after he assaulted her — accepting gifts, meeting his mother, and having consensual sex with him. 
A familiar sick feeling washed over me. I could understand how Argento could allow the same man who she says forced himself on her to continue to be part of her life. I also knew — just as she did — exactly how this sequence of events would affect her credibility, in the public’s eye, if she came forward about the assault. 
“He made it sound like he was my friend and he really appreciated me,” Argento tells Farrow about the relationship she and Weinstein formed after the alleged rape. I shuddered in recognition.
Once upon a time, my rapist, another well-connected and accomplished man, did the same to me. Not only did he encourage me to pretend as though nothing bad had happened between us, but he also made it abundantly clear that he would trade on his privilege to encourage me to stay silent.
“A real rape victim wouldn’t do that”
Among the basic tenets of rape culture is the typecasting of the rapist as an aberrant monster and an outlier. Rape culture does not allow for the possibility that a rapist can be a regular guy with a family, your neighbor or colleague, a trusted friend, or the cute guy smiling from across the room at a party. To allow for that possibility is to admit that none of us are truly safe. It would also mean admitting that the victim could not have predicted the rapist’s behavior.  
One rape culture myth is the idea that “a real rape victim” always acts bravely in the aftermath. She would never appear to be on good terms with her rapist — she would only treat him as the monster he revealed himself to be. A famous example of this is the case of Emma Sulkowicz, or “mattress girl,” who famously accused a fellow Columbia University student of rape. Because Sulkowicz sent friendly texts to the student, Paul Nungesser, after the incident, doubt was cast on her story. Nungesser went on to sue Columbia for sexual discrimination and reached a settlement.
“A real rape victim wouldn’t do that,” a male friend told me when we were discussing the controversy. 
Yet to cast doubt on this scenario ignores both the power differentials between men and women in society and the self-loathing survivors deal with in the aftermath of rape. 
The night that changed me
When I was in my 20s and just starting my writing career, I met a charming fellow writer. He was successful and constantly surrounded by admirers. Meanwhile, I was an unknown.
He was known for being a political progressive. Journalists wrote breathless articles about how reading his work had changed their lives. In spite of all that, he seemed shy, startled by his own fame. That disarming shyness was a good disguise.
When we saw each other again, in a different city where I barely knew anyone, I readily accepted his invitation to a party at his friend’s house. It was there, after lots of laughter and many more drinks, that he leaned in for a kiss — and my world was turned upside down.
He led and I followed willingly into a private room. What started out as consensual turned into something else as he became increasingly violent. Through the haze of alcohol, I remember him gripping me so tightly that I cried out in pain. He clearly liked the sound of me in pain, because things only got worse from there. I could not believe it was happening at first. “You’re hurting me,” I kept saying. “I don’t want this. Please, no.” He apologized — and then he kept going. 
“You should have known better.” I heard that refrain many times in the years that followed about what happened after that kiss. I heard it especially loud in my own head. I was young, hopeful, and dazzled by him — but I was also a survivor of childhood sexual abuse and violence. How could I not have seen the signs, spotted the fatal flaw? I would later come to realize there was nothing that gave away what would follow. 
In the light of dawn, he finally let me go. We could both see the road map of bruises and bloody scratches on my body. I was shaking with horror and disgust. He alternated between begging for forgiveness and insisting that nothing bad had occurred. Then he spoke of his admiration for my talent. He said he felt like I had a bright future but that I still needed to jump through hoops to find success.
My rapist hugged me by the shoulders and offered me writing advice. I sat next to him, wiping away tears, and listened. 
We were friends — that was the fiction I created for myself. We’d just had too much to drink. It had been “confusing.” He hadn’t actually meant to hurt me. Forget reporting the rape: Merely admitting it to myself made me want to die. 
When enabling a rapist is “good for your career”
Admitting the truth was dangerous to my writing career. When he came up in conversation in my professional circles, I played out the scene in my head. What if I said, “Actually, this guy is a rapist who got off on my helplessness and pain? Stay away from him.” What would his many fans, fans who included mutual friends of ours, say? I would be cast out. I would be branded a hysterical bitch, a liar, and a jealous fraud who wanted to ruin a great man of letters. Who would want to work with me after that?
My rapist, meanwhile, went around introducing me to people, helping me network, pointing me out to his friends whenever we ran into each other. “Natalia is talented; read her plays,” he’d say. Oh, and you also raped me, I would think. The contradictory thoughts would ensue. He feels like he owes me, and that’s why he’s doing this. Or maybe, the bitter voice of my own self-hatred whispered, I owed him. Sexual violence doesn’t just affect the body. It warps and pollutes the mind.
He had already done the bad thing. He had assaulted me. Now the least he could do was make up for it somehow. I’ve heard plenty of women assaulted by their colleagues say the same thing over the years. But the truth is, favors from a rapist become just another sick game the victim is drawn into. It doesn’t make anything better — not on the inside, anyway. It makes things worse. 
“When I see him, it makes me feel little and stupid and weak,” Argento said of Weinstein. I know that feeling well. Sexual assault engenders it, and being forced to play nice with your rapist perpetuates it. The guilt of knowing that your silence may have enabled your rapist to harm others sits like a slab of granite on your chest. 
In the United States, only about a third of rapes and sexual assaults are reported. It’s not just that rape is a difficult crime to prosecute — it’s that our very attitudes about rape are simplistic. To this day, we still talk more about what women should do to prevent rape as opposed to worrying over how to raise boys not to feel entitled to women’s bodies.
Harvey Weinstein, while admitting some wrongdoing and denying that he raped anyone, has also defended himself by suggesting that he is merely a product of a different time. Yet we recently elected a man who boasts about assaulting women to the highest office in the land. How much has really changed, after all?  
As for me, years later, I began trying to rebuild my self-worth against all odds. You are not the thing he did to you, I tell myself these days. You don’t owe him anything. They still occasionally sound hollow, these words. 
One day, I hope they will stick.
Natalia Antonova is a writer and journalist. She is the associate editor of openDemocracy Russia and a co-founder of the Anti-Nihilist Institute. 

First Person is Vox's home for compelling, provocative narrative essays. Do you have a story to share? Read our submission guidelines, and pitch us at firstperson@vox.com.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 






    In This Stream
  
#MeToo: Sexual harassment and assault allegations continue to surface across industries


R. Kelly has received his second jail sentence for sex crimes. Here are all the sexual misconduct allegations against him.


Some victims stayed friends with Harvey Weinstein. I did the same with my rapist. Here’s why.


How nondisclosure agreements protect sexual predators



    View all 283 stories
  




    Next Up In
    
        The Latest















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













