



Why Scott Kelly’s return to Earth is like an epic bad hangover - Vox

























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Why Scott Kelly’s return to Earth is like an epic bad hangover



    
      By
      
Brian Resnick@B_resnick



  Mar  4, 2016,  4:20pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Why Scott Kelly’s return to Earth is like an epic bad hangover












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Photo by Eric Kayne/Getty Images






Brian Resnick
        is Vox’s science and health editor, and is the co-creator of Unexplainable, Vox's podcast about unanswered questions in science. Previously, Brian was a reporter at Vox and at National Journal.
      




After a year in space, NASA astronaut Scott Kelly returned to Earth a changed man.
For one, he emerged from the Soyuz landing capsule Tuesday around 1.5 inches taller than he was before the mission. (In microgravity, the spine decompresses and extends.) And, at first, he felt great, Kelly said at a NASA press conference on Friday.
But then, gravity started tugging on his body.
"I'm surprised how I do feel different physically than I did the last time," Kelly told reporters, comparing this latest re-entry to his previous six-month mission in 2010.
His description of the experience since landing sounds like an epically bad hangover. Every muscle hurts. His skin even hurts. And he just can't perform at his best. (Though he made no mention of a headache.)
Kelly explained:

Initially, this time, coming out of the capsule, I felt better than last time. But at some point those two lines have crossed. My level of muscle soreness and fatigue is a lot higher than it was last time. It makes me think there a linear function to it [meaning the more time you spend in space, the worse you will feel when you return.] Also, my skin, because it hasn't touched anything for so long ... it's very, very sensitive. It's like a burning feeling wherever I sit or lie or walk.

Later in the press conference, Kelly explained he tried to shoot some hoops after returning to the ground. "I didn't get any of them in the net," he said. "Not like I'm a good basketball player generally."
NASA sent Kelly on the year-long mission to study whether a year in space would take a greater toll on his body than the typical six-month mission. They won't actually know for a while: It will take at least a year for Kelly's data to be analyzed, NASA scientists said.
But anecdotally, the man himself says it was tougher both physically and psychologically. With six months, he said, "you can see the end." With the year trip, he said, it felt like he lived on the space station forever.
"The hardest part is being isolated in a physical sense from the people on the ground that are important to you," Kelly said during a previous press conference aboard the space station. "There's a loss of connection with folks on the ground that you care for and love and you want to spend time with, which is a challenge."
NASA will have to address these concerns during a Mars mission, where a round trip journey would last a year or more.
And while Kelly did say he grew an inch and a half in space, (possibly giving him a height advantage over his twin Mark for the first time in his life) he knows that benefit will disappear quickly.
"Gravity pushes you back down to size," he says.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Science















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













