



Boeing 737 crash: all safe after St. Johns River crash in Jacksonville - Vox


























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











A Boeing 737 safely landed in a Jacksonville, Florida river

No one was killed; 21 people were wounded. 


    
      By
      
Kelly Cohen



  May  4, 2019,  9:38am EDT









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
A Boeing 737 safely landed in a Jacksonville, Florida river












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















The 737 partially submerged in Jacksonville. 
Jacksonville Sheriff’s Office



A Boeing 737 with 143 people aboard slid off a runway into a shallow river in Jacksonville, Florida on Friday night as pilots attempted a landing in the middle of a thunderstorm.
All 136 passengers and seven flight crew members on board are alive and accounted for, although 21 adults were transported to local hospitals with minor injuries, officials said.
Officials did not immediately say what caused the plane to leave the runway and go into the St. Johns River. 
The plane, a chartered Boeing 737-800, was arriving from Naval Station Guantanamo Bay in Cuba to Naval Air Station Jacksonville at about 9:40 p.m. Eastern Standard Time when the incident occurred, a spokesman for the Florida air base said.
Capt. Michael P. Connor, the commanding officer at Naval Air Station Jacksonville, said at a news conference that “the cause of the mishap has yet to be determined” and praised the skill of the first responders on the scene.
“We could be talking about a different story this evening. So there’s a lot to say about the professionalism of the folks that helped the passengers off the airplane,” Conor said early Saturday. “Some of them were coming back to see their families, some of them were continuing on travel to their homes outside of Florida.”


#JSO Marine Unit was called to assist @NASJax_ in reference to a commercial airplane in shallow water.  The plane was not submerged.  Every person is alive and accounted for. pic.twitter.com/4n1Fyu5nTS— Jax Sheriff's Office (@JSOPIO) May 4, 2019



The mayor of Jacksonville, Lenny Curry, said on Twitter that President Donald Trump called him to offer help as the situation was “developing.”
“No fatalities reported. We are all in this together,” Curry said in a separate tweet.


7. No fatalities reported. We are all in this together. Absorb that.— Lenny Curry (@lennycurry) May 4, 2019



Passenger Cheryl Bormann told CNN’s Don Lemon the plane flew through lightning and thunderstorms on the way to Jacksonville.
“As we went down, we had a really hard landing,” Bormann said. “And then the plane bounced and screeched and bounced some more ... then it came to a complete like crash stop.”
Bormann said passengers had no idea where they were at first.
“We were in water. We couldn’t tell where we were, whether it was a river or an ocean. There was rain coming down. There was lightning and thunder. And we stood on that wing for a significant period of time. Rescue folks came and eventually someone inflated a life raft that had been on the plane and we began climbing into it. Everybody was helping everybody,” she said.
The flight was operated by Miami Air International, a charter airline with a fleet of Boeing 737-800s, that is contracted by the military for its twice-weekly “rotator” roundtrip service between the US mainland and Guantanamo Bay, said Bill Dougherty, a spokesperson for the base in Jacksonville. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is investigating the cause of the crash.


The NTSB is sending a Go Team to investigate Miami Air International flight 293, a Boeing 737-800, which departed runway and came to rest in St. Johns River, Jacksonville, Florida (no reported fatalities).— NTSB_Newsroom (@NTSB_Newsroom) May 4, 2019



While the plane involved in the Jacksonville incident is a Boeing 737, it is not a 737 Max, the plane involved in two deadly crashes less than six months apart. Those crashes are currently under investigation by the Department of Justice as the airplane manufacture retools the plane. 
In a statement released on Twitter, Boeing said it is cooperating with the NTSB’s investigation into the Jacksonville crash.


pic.twitter.com/w5Xs9H1kwt— Boeing Airplanes (@BoeingAirplanes) May 4, 2019








Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        The Latest















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













