



LA teachers strike: teachers and city leaders reach tentative deal - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











The LA teachers strike may be over. Here’s the tentative deal.

Teachers would get a pay raise and smaller classes after their week-long strike.


    
      By
      
Alexia Fernández Campbell@AlexiaCampbell



  Jan 22, 2019,  6:30pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
The LA teachers strike may be over. Here’s the tentative deal.












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Marua Corona, center, a high school teacher at the Accelerated Schools, a community of public charter schools in South Los Angeles, joins fellow teachers as they picket outside the school on second day of the teachers strike on January 15, 2019.
Al Seib/Los Angeles Times via Getty Images



Los Angeles public school teachers have reached a tentative deal with city leaders to end a strike that has shut down the nation’s second-largest school district for more than a week.
As part of the deal, teachers would get a 6 percent raise and slightly fewer students in each classroom, according to Alex Caputo-Pearl, president of United Teachers Los Angeles, a labor union that represents about 34,000 public school teachers, nurses, librarians, and support staff in the city. 
“We have seen over the last week something pretty amazing happen,” Caputo-Pearl said at a press conference Tuesday morning at City Hall. “The creativity, innovation, passion, and love and emotion of our members was out on the street for everyone to see.” He was joined at the press conference by LA Mayor Eric Garcetti and District Superintendent Austin Beutner. The group said they reached a deal after an all-night negotiating session that ended at 6:15 am. 
The deal includes hiring more nurses, guidance counselors, librarians, and support staff. The district will also try to limit the expansion of charters schools and will reevaluate testing requirements. Union members still need to vote on the contract before ending their strike, which has now lasted six days. If union and school board members ratify the contract, classes will resume on Wednesday and more than 600,000 students can return to school.
Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, called the agreement a “paradigm shift.”
“For the first time in recent memory, the conversation has focused on how to fund our schools so students have the support they need,” Weingarten told me.
The deal follows a week of tense negotiating between teachers and school officials, who felt added pressure as the strike gained national — and even international — attention. Teachers pointed out that California is one of the wealthiest states in the country but ranks toward the bottom in how much money it invests per student. It’s unclear how much more money the state plans to funnel to its largest school district, but the strike certainly pushed local and state officials to hustle. 
“The strike was painful and it had a cost, but it helped,” Garcetti said during Tuesday’s press conference.
The strike’s success adds new momentum to a national movement to boost investment in public education. Frustration over stagnant teacher wages, crumbling infrastructure, and deep budget cuts to education fueled a wave of teacher protests in conservative states in 2018. Educators went on strike in Arizona, West Virginia, Kentucky, and Oklahoma, forcing state lawmakers to raise their pay and spend more on schools. 
The strike in Los Angeles suggests that the movement is expanding beyond the red states where it began, and could lead more progressive states to reexamine their investment in public education too.
The strike got school officials to move, fast
With 640,000 students, Los Angeles has the second-largest school district in the US (behind only New York City). Much of the student population is poor and underserved — about 80 percent of kids qualify for free or reduced-price lunch. 
Yet California is among the states that spend the least on each student (adjusted for the cost of living), largely because of the state’s strict limits on property tax rates.
Union leaders and school district officials had spent more than a year negotiating a new contract but made little progress. Beutner, the school district’s superintendent, repeatedly blasted union leaders for trying “bankrupt” the city with its expensive proposals.
The teachers union has demanded a number of changes, including smaller class sizes; limited standardized testing; more support staff, such as nurses, librarians, and academic counselors; and a 6.5 percent salary increase. The union also wants the state to limit the expansion of public charter schools — privately run schools that receive state funding but are subject to fewer regulations. 
Negotiations stalled even after teachers, nurses, and librarians voted in August to authorize a strike. It wasn’t until teachers walked out of class last week, shutting down every public school in the city, that talks began to move forward.
On Thursday, Gavin Newsom, California’s new Democratic governor, proposed a $209 billion budget that would increase school spending; school district officials also agreed to make some changes to classroom sizes and teacher salaries. Union leaders rejected the offer on Friday, calling it “woefully inadequate.” 
After spending the weekend back at the negotiating table, there was a breakthrough. 
On the surface, the deal appears to address most of the teachers’ concerns, though class sizes will only shrink by about four students — one each year for the next four years. The city’s middle and high school teachers currently have an average of 32 students in each classroom, double the national average.
During the press conference, Garcetti described the deal as “historic,” while the schools superintendent struck a more cautious tone. “We can’t solve 40 years of underinvestment in education in one week or one contract,” Beutner said.
Teachers and other union members are expected to vote Tuesday to approve the contract. If it fails, they go back to the table to strike another deal. If it passes, and the school board approves it, teachers will go back to work Wednesday. 




Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 






    In This Stream
  
Teachers strike in Arizona, West Virginia and Oklahoma


The 11-day teachers strike in Chicago paid off


The LA teachers strike may be over. Here’s the tentative deal.


Democrat Richard Ojeda, a champion of West Virginia’s teachers, says he is running for president



    View all 39 stories
  




    Next Up In
    
        Politics















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













