



Bernie Sanders’s path to the nomination is getting very narrow - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Bernie Sanders’s path to the nomination is getting very narrow



    
      By
      
Jeff Stein



  Mar  2, 2016,  1:30pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Bernie Sanders’s path to the nomination is getting very narrow












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Bernie Sanders's path to the Democratic nomination got narrower Tuesday night. 
Tom Williams/CQ Roll Call



The Democratic nomination is now Hillary Clinton's to lose.
Bernie Sanders still has time to mount an improbable comeback. But, barring any political earthquakes, Clinton's sizable delegate lead and broad coalition make it difficult to imagine how Sanders can pull off an upset, according to close trackers of the race.
"Clinton has been the huge favorite this whole time and continues to be," said Kyle Kondik, managing editor of Sabato's Crystal Ball at the University of Virginia's Center for Politics. "I don't see how Sanders catches up to her."
On Super Tuesday, Clinton surged ahead of Sanders by the metric that matters most: delegates. She racked up 505 delegates in winning seven of 11 states, compared with the 334 delegates Sanders took in winning four states, according to an analysis by Richard Berg-Andersson, a researcher who tracks Democratic delegate math at the Green Papers. (Some districts remained too close to call as of Wednesday morning.)
"Clinton had the night she needed to have," Berg-Andersson said. "She's now well on her way to winning the nomination."
Why Super Tuesday was mostly bad for Bernie Sanders





Clinton now leads Sanders by around 200 pledged delegates — in large part because of her big wins across many Southern states on Tuesday.
It's tough to see how Sanders closes that gap, even if he runs more or less evenly with her the rest of the race. That's in part because the Democratic Party awards delegates proportionally, meaning candidates need to win the popular vote by big margins to make up a delegate deficit.
 










Hillary Clinton looks increasingly likely to win the Democratic nomination in 2016. (Kevin Hagen/Getty Images)
Beyond the delegate math, Super Tuesday provided several other reasons to doubt that Sanders could seriously threaten Clinton for the nomination.
Perhaps the biggest reason is that Clinton has continued to clobber Sanders among African-American voters, and not just in the Deep South. She won a massive 93 percent of the black vote in Alabama, for instance, but also won black voters in Oklahoma, Virginia, Texas, and Tennessee by huge margins.
There had been some speculation that Sanders had closed the gap with Hispanic voters in Nevada. But as FiveThirtyEight's Harry Enten notes, Clinton won Hispanic voters by around 42 points in Texas — suggesting Florida and New Mexico will also be favorable terrain for the former secretary of state.
Then there was also evidence that Sanders's appeal is limited even among white voters. Sanders lost Massachusetts, even though white people made up 86 percent of the electorate; he also lost the white vote in Tennessee, Texas, Georgia, and Virginia, according to NBC News's exit polls.
Sanders's biggest problem: Where does he rack up delegates?
The problem for Sanders isn't just that Clinton swept the Southern states. It's also that she's likely run well ahead of him in primaries with big Democratic establishments that loom large on the calendar.
"I think Massachusetts was the most telling win of the night," said Elaine Kamarck, senior fellow and director of the Center for Effective Public Management at the Brookings Institution. "In a place that's in Bernie Sanders's backyard and known for its liberalism, she still won."
 








Clinton's strength in Massachusetts, which she won narrowly, probably reflects her strength in states with strong Democratic institutions. And that suggests she'll have a huge advantage when the contest reaches delegate-rich states like Pennsylvania, Ohio, Illinois, and New York.
"Those are areas with large African-American populations and an established Democratic Party organization that will be very Hillary-friendly," Berg-Andersson said. "Sanders is not going to get delegate boosts from those states."
By contrast, the kinds of states where Sanders has done well don't tend to have that many delegates.
A big piece of Sanders's coalition has been downscale white voters, who helped him win Oklahoma by 10 points on Tuesday. But while there are many states that fit this demographic makeup, most of them just aren't very big and don't have that many delegates. (Added up, the Sanders-friendly states like Kansas, Nebraska, Idaho, Wyoming, and Oregon have around the same number of delegates as Clinton-friendly Illinois.)
None of this is to say that Sanders is certainly done. Sanders's campaign argued on Wednesday that Sanders has a viable path to the nomination that runs through industrial Midwestern states battered by the recession, according to the Washington Post.
That strategy would make the March 8 primary in Michigan, which has 147 delegates, a crucial battleground for Sanders. "We still think we have a winning hand in this game, and we’re going to continue to play it," said Tad Devine, a Sanders aide, according to the Washington Post.
But with Clinton leading by double digits in several recent national polls, Sanders will have to change something — and do it fast — to alter the fundamentals of the race.
"[Clinton] has a substantial lead, a substantial delegate lead, and a great deal of momentum," Kamarck said. "I suspect she's going to win. But it's not impossible for him to come back."



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 






    In This Stream
  
Super Tuesday 2016 results


It's now clear that only a Democrat can stop Donald Trump


Bernie Sanders’s path to the nomination is getting very narrow


Why #NeverTrump is doomed



    View all 37 stories
  




    Next Up In
    
        Politics















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













