



Hollywood's extreme lack of diversity, explained by a brilliant Tumblr - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Hollywood's extreme lack of diversity, explained by a brilliant Tumblr



    
      By
      
Tanya Pai@TanyaPai


            
                Updated
            
            
  Feb 24, 2016,  1:25pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Hollywood's extreme lack of diversity, explained by a brilliant Tumblr












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Blink and you'll probably miss him: Andreas Sheikh (third from left) is the only minority character in Wes Anderson's Moonrise Kingdom. 
YouTube



The Academy Awards are just a few days away, and amid the excitement is some vocal frustration at the fact that the films and people being recognized are, once again, overwhelmingly white and male.
It's a well-documented problem not just in the Academy but in Hollywood overall — and the brilliant Tumblr Every Single Word found a creative way to illustrate the severity of the issue. Created by 27-year-old Venezuelan American actor and playwright Dylan Marron, Every Single Word shows what Hollywood films would look like if they were condensed to just the lines spoken by minorities over the course of their run times. As it turns out, many would be much more like Vine videos than feature-length films. 
Marron was fed up with hearing that as a nonwhite actor he was "never going to play the romantic male lead," as he told the Washington Post's Soraya Nadia McDonald in an interview in July 2015, so he set out to show just how few minorities are playing lead parts in Hollywood. 
Take, for instance, American Hustle, which was nominated for 10 Oscars in 2015 — Marron's minorities-only cut comes in at 53 seconds:

Or critical darling Wes Anderson's Moonrise Kingdom, which clocks in at an anemic 10 seconds:

Or the 2014 Biblical epic Noah, coming in at ... zero:

To the Post's McDonald, Marron explained how he picks the movies he features on his Tumblr:

There’s a big variety of movies, but they do have one thing in common: all of these movies are not about whiteness. They are not about white people. They are not about the experience of being white and they are not historical dramas that are just about white people. They’re not about whiteness. They are about really universal and very human themes.

He continued:

So my question with these videos is why are we using white people to tell these universal stories? And what is that saying? I think it’s saying something really dangerous and the message it gives to people of color — and I can say this as a person of color who grew up watching these stories that I related to thematically and didn’t see reflections of myself in them — what it tells you is you don’t really have a place in this world.

This is not a new issue
The idea of white as the "normal" is longstanding, pervasive, and ties into the concept of implicit bias that manifests itself in American society in areas as widespread as criminal justice and education.
One area in which diversity has seen an uptick recently is in television: Shows like ABC’s Black-ish and Fresh Off the Boat and the ratings behemoth that was the first season of Fox’s Empire proved beyond the shadow of a doubt that not only is there an audience for series centered on nonwhite characters, but that they have the potential to be hugely successful.
However, there's also the Mindy Kaling–created The Mindy Project, the first network TV series created by and starring an Indian American (and a woman, no less), which has been criticized for not having enough focus on the lead's ethnicity — or as Al Jazeera's E. Alex Chung phrased it, "Almost any exchange [Kaling's character Mindy] Lahiri has about race appears meant to prove that she is not one of the others but a full-blooded American."
But it is pervasive
But while television is making strides toward diversity, the silver screen still notably lags behind. In its 2015 Hollywood Diversity Report, UCLA's Ralph J. Bunche Center for African American Studies found that "[a]lthough minorities posted several modest gains in several Hollywood employment arenas since the last report, they remain underrepresented on every front." The report examined the top 200 theatrical releases from both 2012 and 2013, and found that minorities, who comprise 40 percent of the US population, were sorely underrepresented as male leads:










Ralph J. Bunche Center


As cast members:










Ralph J. Bunche Center


And as directors:










Ralph J. Bunche Center


The Comprehensive Annenberg Report on Diversity, from the Media, Diversity & Social Change Initiative at USC's Annenberg School, found that of 414 films and TV series studied, women had only one-third of the speaking roles and minorities just 28.3 percent.
And the lack of diversity is not just for lack of effort; as the Washington Post's Alyssa Rosenberg pointed out in a May 2015 piece aptly titled "How Hollywood stays white and male":

the same laws that protect against employment discrimination also block certain efforts to hire more women and people of color. Networks can set goals for how many female writers they want to hire, or how many characters of color they want to see on screen, but they can’t legally use quotas to reach those goals.

Marron's Tumblr serves to point out that while show biz may be improving in some areas, its diversity problem is far from "fixed." And he summed up that impact on this year's Oscars succinctly:
 














Watch: The Oscars' horrible lack of diversity, explained in under 2 minutes





Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        The Latest















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













