



Why rabbis are planning to boycott Donald Trump’s AIPAC speech - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Why rabbis are planning to boycott Donald Trump’s AIPAC speech



    
      By
      
Tara Golshan



  Mar 21, 2016, 12:00pm EDT









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Why rabbis are planning to boycott Donald Trump’s AIPAC speech












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Rabbis and AIPAC-goers are frustrated by what they find to be hateful rhetoric from Donald Trump.
Eduardo Munoz Alvarez/Getty Images



According to Donald Trump, there is "no one more pro-Israel" than himself — a phrase he will likely repeat in his speech at the American Israel Public Affairs Committee Monday evening.
But Trump's past statements on Israel have prompted rabbis and other AIPAC conference attendees to organize a walkout of the Republican frontrunner's AIPAC speech.
"We must let him speak but we are not obliged to listen," an AIPAC attendee said on the protest's organizing Facebook page, which has nearly 1,800 members.
"Our goal is not to disrupt the proceedings or to offend any of our fellow conference attendees. Our hope is to shine a moral light on the darkness that has enveloped Mr. Trump’s campaign," reads the description of the Facebook event, "Come Together Against Hate."
In an interview with Breitbart, Rabbi David Paskin, an organizer of the protest, said the walkout is a reaction to Trump calling Mexican immigrants rapists, most Muslims terrorists, and American Jews money-hungry negotiators.
"This is about denouncing hatred in all forms," Paskin told Breitbart. "Everyone here at AIPAC denounces hatred. ... We are going to continue to come together against hate. We are going to argue that what Mr. Trump calls PC, is not a bad thing, it is what we Jews call … being a good person."
Trump has been walking on shaky ground with pro-Israel Americans this presidential election cycle. While pledging general support toward Israel – a mainstay of Republican foreign policy – he has waffled on some of the specifics.
He said he would not move the US Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem and would remain "neutral" on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict – two no-nos for the crowd at America's most prolific pro-Israel group (not to mention initially failing to disavow the support of former Ku Klux Klan grand wizard David Duke).
Trump's attempts to relate to the Jewish community have not always succeeded: He told the crowd at the Jewish Republican Coalition that they should relate to him on the basis of being good negotiators and because his daughter Ivanka Trump is married to a Jew.
While former AIPAC spokesperson and president of the Israel Project Josh Block told NPR that this will be an opportunity for Trump to refine his views on Israel and "pivot to a more serious approach on foreign policy," protest organizers are less keen to hear what Trump has to say.
According to the Facebook page, the protesters will be gathering outside the Washington, DC, Verizon Center at 5 pm during Trump's speech.
Code Pink and a Palestinian activist group are also expected to hold demonstrations, according to the New York Times.







Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Politics















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













