



Former Microsoft executive Doug Burgum is North Dakota’s next governor - Vox

























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Former Microsoft executive Doug Burgum is North Dakota’s next governor

The Republican was the CEO of Great Plains Software, which Microsoft bought in 2002.


    
      By
      
Ina Fried@inafried



  Nov  9, 2016,  1:42pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Former Microsoft executive Doug Burgum is North Dakota’s next governor












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Doug Burgum for North Dakota



Another businessman-turned-politician was elected Tuesday, though with significantly less controversy.
Former Microsoft executive Doug Burgum won his bid to become the governor of  North Dakota, fueled by a socially moderate, fiscally conservative campaign.
Burgum, who sold his Great Plains Software business to Microsoft in 2002 for $1.1 billion, laid out his plans in a January email interview with Recode. 
“The role of governor is the closest thing to a CEO job in government,” Burgum said. “I have spent my working life attracting capital and talent to North Dakota.”
Here’s an edited transcript of that interview.
Recode: What made you want to run for governor?
Doug Burgum: The private sector, free markets and technology are all huge positive forces that have literally helped change the world. I am grateful to have been able to spend my life as an entrepreneur in the global software industry.
The role of governor is the closest thing to a CEO job in government. I have spent my working life attracting capital and talent to North Dakota. I am interested in working where I can have the biggest impact on my home state, and the role of the governor in North Dakota, among other duties, is to be the lead ambassador and cheerleader for attracting human and financial capital to the state.
I have no desire to be a politician. I do want to be an elected leader.
Are there lessons from your career as an entrepreneur that you feel guide your political philosophy?
Yes. Competition drives innovation, lowers cost, speeds delivery and more. Most government services are monopolies, or near monopolies, and therefore have lacked the market forces that produce better solutions. And most government agencies are lagging behind private industry in technology adoption. There are big opportunities to re-invent government service delivery at all levels.
Which is hardest, running your own business, working for Steve Ballmer or running for office?
Each of these represent unique joys and challenges! I ran Great Plains for 18 years, worked with Steve for six and a half years, and have been running for office for 16 days. The biggest change across all three of these over the last 30 years is the nonstop, 24-hour role that social media plays in building brand, driving opinion and engaging with customers (voters).
What do you make of the Republican presidential race?
It has been great for TV ratings and for people who own media outlets in Iowa and New Hampshire. It remains to be seen if the process produces a viable national candidate who will be competitive in the fall. Today’s campaigns and candidates are a product of a convoluted, legacy, state-by-state primary process that would possibly not exist if one was tasked to start from scratch to invent a new process for identifying and vetting the very best individuals to serve as president of the United States.
How can technology help solve some of the issues facing North Dakota?
Every industry in North Dakota (and everywhere else) is facing accelerating change. Moore’s law, super-cheap storage, increasing bandwidth infrastructure and a proliferation of super low-cost, highly accurate automatic data sensors are transforming every process and workflow. There has been a truism in the tech world that “every company needs to become a software company, or be disrupted by one.” I believe this is absolutely true.
We have a global oil surplus today because of the rapid advancements in technology. This stands in stark contrast to a multi-decade narrative that we were “running out of oil.” In energy exploration, some of these technologic advances that have contributed to the unforeseen abundance, such as deep horizontal drilling, were pioneered in the Bakken formation in North Dakota.
Technology ranging from self-driving tractors with GPS precision, real-time soil analysis (to reduce fertilizer needs) and continued advances in hybrid seed technology are reshaping production agriculture.
Health care delivery markets and systems have been completely distorted by government regulation and mandates, making our health care system less productive. These productivity losses will be compounded by demographics: We have more caregivers (doctors and nurses retiring) and more patients aging, so this will put additional pressures on our health care systems. The only way out of this productivity inversion for health care is to streamline operational workflows with automatically generated data.
And our North Dakota education system, which needs to serve a significant rural as well as increasing urban population, will need to accelerate its efforts to raise outcomes to ensure students of all ages have the skills they need to be competitive in a global economy.
What role is technology playing in your campaign?
Our campaign team is like a lean tech startup today. We are into rapid prototyping and continuous improvement and building community. There are so many low-cost amazing tools, solutions and platforms — from social media, to fundraising, to building websites, to CRM, to accounting and more — to help us share our messages.
Anything else that you want to make sure people know?
I am running as a moderate on social issues and as a fiscal conservative in a state that is socially conservative but has seen government spending rise more rapidly than even our fast-growing economy (fueled by the oil boom and billions of dollars of revenue surpluses at the state level). This race will be decided on the June 14th primary.



This article originally appeared on Recode.net.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Technology















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













