



Midterm elections 2018: Russia trying to influence vote, US says - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











The 2018 midterm election hasn’t been hacked — but Russia is still trying to influence it

China, Iran, and “other nations,” too.


    
      By
      
Alex Ward@AlexWardVox



  Nov  6, 2018, 10:30am EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
The 2018 midterm election hasn’t been hacked — but Russia is still trying to influence it












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Voters line up to cast their ballot just before the polls open in the mid-term election on November 6, 2018, in Miami, United States.
Joe Raedle/Getty Images





Part of
      
      The 2018 midterm elections, explained
    



Here’s the good news: Just hours before millions vote in the 2018 midterms, top US security officials said they see no evidence a foreign government compromised the election. 
But now here’s the bad news: Those same officials say Russia and other countries aim to “influence” the election, in part by spreading misinformation.
In other words, your actual ballot is safe, but other countries may still try to influence how you vote.
The Monday night statement by Director of National Intelligence Dan Coats, Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen, Attorney General Jeff Sessions, and FBI Director Christopher Wray was clearly meant to calm any nerves ahead of the election. 
But it’s unsettling to hear that adversaries are still trying to shift public opinion, mostly via online methods.
During the 2016 presidential election, for example, Russia used fake Facebook ads, Twitter bots, and other means to sow discord among the public and spread false information. It seems Moscow is at it again, and that China and Iran are also running influence campaigns.
“They can do this by spreading false information about political processes and candidates, lying about their own interference activities, disseminating propaganda on social media, and through other tactics,” the statement by leading US security officials reads.
President Donald Trump signed an executive order in September that would allow the US to automatically sanction any foreigner caught trying to interfere in the election, but that doesn’t seem to have slowed down the pace of meddling attempts. 
The Boston Globe reported on Monday that the federal government has logged more than 160 instances of suspected interference since August 1 and has jumped to about 10 instances a day in the few weeks before the midterms. 
They targeted voter registries, election officials, and other networks used to run the midterms. The attackers had some “limited success,” according to intelligence reports reviewed by the Globe, but it’s unclear exactly what that means. Most of the incidents were “foreign-based,” according to official reports.
There are also other apparent meddling efforts. On Monday night, Facebook blocked 115 accounts — including 85 on Instagram — that US law enforcement said might be connected to foreign organizations that want to meddle in the election. Most of the Facebook pages were in French and Russian, but the Instagram posts were mainly in English. Facebook has also had to delete fake accounts tied to Iran in the months before the midterm elections.
Here’s how not to let Russia, China, or Iran influence your vote
The officials offered three main ways to minimize the risk of influence by foreign governments.

“Get election information straight from the source — your state or local election office.” They will have up-to-date information on where and how to vote, as well as election results.
“Think before you link.” Be careful about the information promoted on social media or elsewhere. A good practice is to verify something from multiple sources before assuming it’s true.
Report any suspicious activity, whether it’s eyebrow-raising ads online or divisive information spread by an unknown source.

But again, the important thing to keep in mind is that a foreign country won’t alter your vote after it has been cast, according to the Trump administration. Not even Russia can do that — at least not yet.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 






The 2018 midterm elections, explained





              Explainers
              
                

                    5
                  






The midterm elections are about whether Republican power will be checked
2018 is the identity politics election
The 2018 election results won’t tell us what America thinks about Trump
The state of the battle for the House of Representatives, explained
The 2018 election is a referendum on American democracy






              Races to watch
              
                

                    9
                  






The 10 most important Senate elections, briefly explained
The 16 most interesting House races of 2018
The 13 most important governor elections in 2018, briefly explained
The 9 most important state legislature elections in 2018, explained
7 key governor races that could let Democrats roll back gerrymandering
The last-minute hacking allegations in the Georgia governor race, explained
Ted Cruz’s surprisingly competitive battle against Beto O’Rourke, explained
Nevada Democratic Senate candidate Jacky Rosen is making a bet that she can run on immigration — and win
The attacks on Arizona Senate candidate Kyrsten Sinema’s upbringing, explained






              The issues
              
                

                    11
                  






Voters in key Senate races say Kavanaugh battle is a motivator for the 2018 midterms
10 House races where health care could swing the 2018 election
House Democrats are not finished with Brett Kavanaugh
Voter ID rulings in Missouri and North Dakota could help decide control of the Senate
Republicans are misleading voters about preexisting conditions 
If Republicans hold on to Congress in 2019, Obamacare repeal could come back
Governor races really matter for climate change. Here are the ones to watch.
How 2018 voters could change America’s criminal justice system
How Ohio voters could upend the state’s war on drugs this November
The midterm elections will give some voters a chance to legalize marijuana
Democrats are running to the middle to win the midterms






              Polling
              
                

                    5
                  






What the final Senate polls say for Democrats’ chances
Polls show Democrats with an advantage in the House. They still might not take Congress.
3 new polls show Democrats really could flip the House in November
Poll: Women voters are driving Democrats’ favorability gains in battleground House districts
New poll finds a 30-point gender gap going into the midterms






              Guides for voters
              
                

                    4
                  






2018 midterm elections: what time the polls open and close
Can you take paid time off work to vote? It may depend where you live.
The battle over early voting, explained
Registered to vote? Here are the voter registration deadlines in all 50 states.






              Election Day news and results
              
                

                    13
                  






2018 midterm election live results
The big lie Republicans are telling this election
Young people say they plan to vote at near-historic highs
US voting machines are failing. Here’s why.
Why long lines at polling places are a voting rights issue
Voting hours in parts of Georgia extended after technical errors create long lines
Uber, Lyft, and more are offering discounted rides to the polls on Election Day
Is voting a civic right or a civic duty?
It could take days — or weeks — to find out which party won Congress
Washington votes no on a carbon tax — again
The 2018 campaign revealed the true fissure in American democracy
Beto O’Rourke could lead a blue wave in Texas — even if he loses his Senate race
The right to vote is under siege in 2018



Show More











          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe































Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













