



Marissa Mayer's Big Red Book: A Guide to What the Yahoo CEO Will Do Next - Vox

























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Marissa Mayer's Big Red Book: A Guide to What the Yahoo CEO Will Do Next

"You don't have the book?" joked one departed staffer to me. "You really need to see the book." I really did -- and so do you.


    
      By
      
Kara Swisher@karaswisher



  Feb  2, 2016,  1:15am EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Marissa Mayer's Big Red Book: A Guide to What the Yahoo CEO Will Do Next












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email





















In the late fall, employees across Yahoo arrived at work to find a message from CEO Marissa Mayer on their desks. Delivered to everyone simultaneously, it was in the form of a book — the “big red book,” in fact, as it would soon be called across the Silicon Valley Internet giant — that she had created to explain Yahoo to, well, Yahoos.
On the opening pages of the thick tome — with a hip design, much font action, a whole lot of bold colors and a vague tone of forced fun — its goal was explicitly stated: “This book is a guide.”
I was happy to finally get my hands on one. “You don’t have the book?” joked one departed staffer to me. “You really need to see the book.”
I really did. And so do you.

Commissioned by Mayer in a project run by her chief of staff Andrew Schulte and produced by Addison Publishing, it cost about $1 million, said sources. Books like this are not uncommon in Silicon Valley, most often made to be given to new employees as part of the onboarding process at hiring.

In this case, Mayer seems to have had a different goal, in what appears to be a splashy analog attempt to boost morale. But, more than anything, it is also an insight into her thinking, displaying a mix of stubborn defiance and aggressive cheeriness strewn with the kind of you-can-do-it bromides you might find at a Tony Robbins seminar.
“Our hope is that it will give everyone a shared sense of the amazing company that we work for and the incredible opportunities within our reach,” read some text. “Let’s do this.”

It also stars Mayer. “We take our work seriously,” read one page, atop a photo of a smiling exec at a computer (which you can see above), “but we don’t take ourselves seriously.”
In another, there is a call for Yahoo to “kick ass again.”

In still another, the book shows a selfie of Mayer on her first day at the company in July of 2012, with a reprint of her confidential memo about her new job.

Such confidence is much needed by Mayer today; she finds herself in a very tough situation as she announces Yahoo’s fourth-quarter earnings. Aside from the actual results, investors are looking for her and CFO Ken Goldman to give some clear statement about the plans for a spinoff of its core assets and also details about cost cuts, largely via layoffs and closures of low-performing units.
Most important of all, though, will be whether there are explicit signals from Mayer about whether the company is open to a sale. On Friday, Yahoo’s board met to discuss this critical issue, as potential suitors circle the company waiting for it to publicly declare itself interested in acquisition discussions.
That has been pushed by activist shareholders like Starboard Value, which has been agitating for a sale of Yahoo’s core assets. If not, it is promising a proxy fight that will mire Yahoo in a yet another protracted public tussle.
While there have been no substantive talks as yet, giant telcos like Verizon and AT&T are waiting for an opening to make possible bids. “No one can be seen in a hostile takeover mode,” said one person close to the situation. “Yahoo has to really show its cards for anything to start.”
That might or might not happen today. According to sources, at the Friday meeting, Mayer laid out a plan for turnaround, appealing for more time from the board to fix Yahoo.
But a number of directors have become convinced that she will not be able to deliver that, especially since she has been trying to do so for several years now with a variety of largely failed efforts at Yahoo.
“They are emotionally supportive of Mayer and her desire to keep at it, but some of the board just wants to get the company sold for as much money as possible,” said one person close to the situation. “They’ve had enough.”
Nonetheless, those directors may face a lot of resistance from Mayer, who is well known for an intense work ethic and an equally strong drive for perfection. Numerous sources close to her said she is determined to solider on; still others said that if there is a decision to sell, she will be the one to manage the process.
Mayer will probably prevail in this, given that directors are loath to directly attack a sitting CEO, especially in the clubby and insular world of Silicon Valley. “To attack Mayer, the most high-profile woman leader in tech, is not for the faint of heart,” said one source. “She has more leverage and determination than you might imagine.”
That’s all reflected in the big red book.
In fact, it stresses what has been her main manifesto for a while — the idea of a virtuous cycle that Mayer has repeated many times at Yahoo.
Reads one page: “Great people build great products. Innovative, forward-leaning products will drive increased traffic and engagement, leading to greater advertiser interest and demand. Ultimately, this translates to revenue.”
And, for Yahoo today, that depends on your definition of “ultimately.”

This article originally appeared on Recode.net.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Technology















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













