



How the Clinton campaign is making #ThatMexicanThing a thing, explained - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











How the Clinton campaign is making #ThatMexicanThing a thing, explained



    
      By
      
Tara Golshan



  Oct  5, 2016,  3:00pm EDT









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
How the Clinton campaign is making #ThatMexicanThing a thing, explained












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Photo by Andrew Gombert - Pool/Getty Images



Sen. Tim Kaine made a point during the vice presidential debate of reminding the American public of that time Donald Trump called Mexican immigrants rapists and drug dealers.
“He started his campaign with a speech where he called Mexicans rapists and criminals,” Kaine said, listing Trump’s most controversial campaign statements. “I cannot imagine how Gov. Pence can defend Donald Trump.”
At first, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence responded with a laugh and a shrug — a seemingly implicit defense of Trump implying Kaine’s attack was unfounded (despite the fact that Trump really has said these things). But Pence’s initial lack of response didn’t stop Kaine. He used the same line four times Tuesday night. And by the fourth time, Pence had had enough.
“Senator, you whipped out that Mexican thing again,” Pence retorted. “There are criminal aliens who have come into this country illegally, who are perpetrating violence. He also said, ‘and many of them are good people.’ Sen. Kaine, you keep leaving them out of your quote.”
“That Mexican thing” was an unusually inarticulate moment for Pence that night, and Twitter noticed. 
How the #ThatMexicanThing went from a joke to a campaign line
Soon the hashtag #ThatMexicanThing was trending on Twitter.


Figuring out what to do for lunch. Might do #thatMexicanthing on the corner.— Mike Birbiglia (@birbigs) October 5, 2016



As Univision’s Jorge Ramos pointed out, it is an even more unfortunate turn of phrase for the vice president of a candidate that has had an extremely difficult time energizing the Latino vote:


First Trump calls Mexicans "rapists". Now Pence says #ThatMexicanThing Question: Is that a creative strategy to win the Latino vote?— JORGE RAMOS (@jorgeramosnews) October 5, 2016



Hillary Clinton supporters used it to express “things” Mexican immigrants actually do — work hard, play by the rules, pay taxes, participate in civic life as Americans, and so on. 


#ThatMexicanThing where undocumented immigrants pay more taxes than @realDonaldTrump does. #VPDebate— Pili Tobar (@pilitobar87) October 5, 2016





#thatmexicanthing is my mom who immigrated to this country, pays her taxes and put two kids through college while managing a business ❤️    — Frank Ramirez (@frankemilio) October 5, 2016





Look at me, I'm  #ThatMexicanThing that has served in the military and graduated college. #NeverTrumpPence— Will Coppedge (@Will_The_Tiger) October 5, 2016



As Republican strategist Ana Navarro notes, Pence’s offhand remark has become a rallying cry for Mexican Americans to highlight their life experiences in the United States, in the face of Trump and Pence’s immigration-skeptical policy proposals.


Latino Twitter abuzz. #ThatMexicanThing now a hashtag Mexican-Americans using to share stories on American dream/work ethic/sacrifices made. https://t.co/HgrfWJrpD9— Ana Navarro (@ananavarro) October 5, 2016



The Clinton campaign also seized on it quickly: www.thatMexicanthing.com now redirects to Hillary Clinton’s campaign website, and Clinton’s campaign is doing its darnedest to make the hashtag #ThatMexicanThing the takeaway from Tuesday’s debate.
It’s an illustration of just how savvy campaigns can be in the face of a losing performance, but it is also a reflection of what Kaine was trying do all night: sink Pence down to Trump’s level. 
If the Clinton campaign succeeds in elevating this debate moment, Kaine’s otherwise damaging interruptions will not have been enacted in vain. Kaine’s strategy was to make Pence defend Trump. It didn’t play out like he hoped, unless this works.
This was possibly one of the only moments for the Clinton-Kaine campaign to seize on
Kaine’s finest moments in the debate were when he listed Trump’s most reprehensible campaign moments — but a lot of them were undermined by his overeagerness to jump into the role of attack dog. 
He interrupted Pence often, interjecting with Trump’s past transgressions. It gave Republicans fodder for a simple post-debate attack video, creating a supercut of all the times Kaine jumped in on Pence’s time. This allowed Republicans to create space for the argument that there’s nothing sexist about the way Trump interrupted Clinton last week at the first debate since her running mate used the same tactic. 
But Pence’s inarticulate moment also highlighted the fact that he had no intention of defending Trump. One of the few times he tried to became a memeable moment, which the Clinton campaign has been quick to co-opt.
Pence’s retort didn’t age well overnight, as media outlets begin to pick up on it on Wednesday and the Clinton campaign continues to push it as Tuesday’s takeaway.
Ultimately, Pence’s remark may not matter in the grand scheme of the election, as vice presidential debates so often don’t, but it undermines a real opportunity for the Trump campaign — a potentially positive news cycle for the first time in more than a week. 

Watch: This election is about normal vs. abnormal







Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      An informed electorate is essential to a functioning democracy. Vox aims to provide clear, concise information that helps people understand the the issues and policy that affects their lives  — and it’s never been more vital than today. But our distinctive explanatory journalism is expensive. Support from our readers helps us keep our work free for everyone. If you have already made a financial contribution to Vox, thank you. If not, please consider making a contribution today from as little as $3.

 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 






    In This Stream
  
Vice presidential debate: Tim Kaine vs. Mike Pence


Mike Pence is no less of a threat to women than Donald Trump


How the Clinton campaign is making #ThatMexicanThing a thing, explained


Tim Kaine interrupted Mike Pence 72 times at the debate. It wasn’t a good look.



    View all 34 stories
  




    Next Up In
    
        Politics















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













