



Tim Ryan is going to challenge Nancy Pelosi to lead House Democrats - Vox


























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Tim Ryan is going to challenge Nancy Pelosi to lead House Democrats

An economic populist with a moderate streak on culture and the environment.


    
      By
      
Matthew Yglesias@mattyglesias



  Nov 17, 2016,  3:45pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Tim Ryan is going to challenge Nancy Pelosi to lead House Democrats












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email





















Younger members of the House Democratic caucus wanted to delay leadership elections to see if a strong challenger to Nancy Pelosi would emerge, and lo and behold, one has — Ohio Rep. Tim Ryan. 
Ryan is a 43-year-old white man from Youngstown who represents a somewhat squiggly-looking congressional district that includes large numbers of African Americans and working-class white voters. His political profile leans toward populism on economic issues — especially trade — but he is more on the moderate side of things in terms of environmental and social issues.
He first entered the House in 2003 and has been pro-life for most of his political career. But in January 2015 he announced a conversion to the pro-choice viewpoint in what most people saw as an effort to position himself as a possible vice presidential candidate.
Ryan definitely represents most Washington Democrats’ idea of what it would mean to position the party more favorably to succeed in Rust Belt states. 
It’s an idea that certainly has similarities with what Bernie Sanders’s internet fan base thinks Democrats should do. But Ryan — like Ohio Sen. Sherrod Brown — is much less consistently liberal than Sanders, while maintaining a Sanders-ish skepticism of trade and Wall Street.
Democrats very much wanted Ryan to be their nominee for the 2016 Senate race. But he declined to get in, so the party instead ran former Gov. Ted Strickland, who got crushed. Given how strong Donald Trump proved to be in the state, Ryan almost certainly would have been crushed too, so his decision to opt out seems savvy. 
The run could be good for Ryan even if he loses
There is a strong sentiment among a number of House backbenchers that the party would do well to replace Pelosi, simply for the sake of presenting a fresh face to voters in 2018. And on paper, a middle-aged white male Midwesterner with a history of moderation on social issues sounds like a better face to put forward in Republican-leaning districts in the midterms than an older woman from San Francisco who’s very much identified with environmentalism and social liberals. 
On the other hand, the energy in the Democratic Party is all on the left right now. And though there is a populist side to Ryan, it’s far from clear that he would really pass muster with the party’s left wing. 
But during the 2016 campaign, Ryan did offer the kind of muscular, economics-based critique of Donald Trump that many Democrats in retrospect wish Clinton had offered. Speaking at a rally in Youngstown in October, Ryan dwelled on Trump’s habit of not paying his subcontractors and said, “I don’t mean to be graphic, but this guy to our friends in the trades — to our steelworkers who he’s been treating unfairly, very unfairly — he will, he will gut you and he will walk over your cold dead body and he won’t even flinch.” 
Even if Ryan loses, however, a leadership run could help his career. Both Pelosi and her deputy in the Democratic leadership hierarchy, Steny Hoyer, are on the older side and won’t be around for long one way or the other. Right now relatively few House members are well-known enough to be strong future leadership candidates. A run at Pelosi could help Ryan build up his profile and position himself for later. 



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Politics















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













