



Trump tweets, “Tariffs are the greatest!” Experts say they’re not. - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Trump makes his trade war pitch: “Tariffs are the greatest!”

They’re not.


    
      By
      
Emily Stewart



  Jul 24, 2018, 11:00am EDT









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Trump makes his trade war pitch: “Tariffs are the greatest!”












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Auto workers rally against President Donald Trump’s proposed tariffs on auto imports and the impact on automakers and their surrounding communities on Capitol Hill on July 19, 2018.
Mark Wilson/Getty Images






Emily Stewart
        covers business and economics for Vox and writes the newsletter The Big Squeeze, examining the ways ordinary people are being squeezed under capitalism. Before joining Vox, she worked for TheStreet.
      




President Donald Trump is taking his trade war pitch to the people. His message: “Tariffs are the greatest!”
Except they’re not — and even his chief economic adviser has said so. 
In a tweet early Tuesday morning, the president sought to reassure Americans that the tariffs he’s imposed on China, Canada, Mexico, the European Union, and Japan are a good idea. His administration has targeted steel and aluminum imports from many American allies, put tariffs on $34 billion of Chinese goods, and is looking to escalate by potentially increasing China tariffs and imposing a tax on imported cars and parts. Many lawmakers on both sides of the aisle, policy experts, and business groups are urging Trump to put on the brakes, but he appears to be moving full speed ahead.
“Tariffs are the greatest,” he tweeted on Tuesday. “Either a country which has treated the United States unfairly on Trade negotiates a fair deal, or it gets hit with Tariffs. It’s a simple as that — and everybody’s talking!”
He reassured Americans that “all will be Great,” despite the growing concerns about his tactics.


Tariffs are the greatest! Either a country which has treated the United States unfairly on Trade negotiates a fair deal, or it gets hit with Tariffs. It’s as simple as that - and everybody’s talking! Remember, we are the “piggy bank” that’s being robbed. All will be Great!— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) July 24, 2018



Speaking to CNBC on Friday, Trump appeared similarly emboldened and brushed aside concerns about the consequences of his trade tactics. He suggested that now is the time to launch trade aggressions because the stock market is up. “You know the expression, ‘We’re playing with the bank’s money,’ right?”
Maybe Trump should check in with his top economic adviser on this whole “tariffs are great” thing
Tariffs are taxes imposed on imported goods and services. They’re meant to raise revenue or protect domestic industries from foreign competition, but they often result in higher prices for businesses that rely on the imported goods — say, manufacturers that use steel and aluminum imports in their supply chain —  and, ultimately, for consumers when companies pass on the extra prices to them. Trump is enacting tariffs in an effort to extract demands from foreign countries, though in most cases, experts say it’s not clear what he wants.
There is a chorus of voices warning against the potential consequences of a trade war, including National Economic Council Director Larry Kudlow — at least before he worked for Trump. In a March op-ed, Kudlow warned Trump that tariffs are likely to backfire and argued that they’re really tax hikes. Referring specifically to the steel and aluminum tariffs, Kudlow wrote, “Since so many of the things American consumers buy today are made of steel or aluminum, a 25 percent tariff will likely get passed on to consumers at the cash register. This is a regressive tax on low-income families.”


.@POTUS this morning: "Tariffs are the greatest!"His current chief economic advisor Larry Kudlow wrote a joint op-ed in March explaining to @POTUS why "tariff hikes are really tax hikes" that "almost always deliver an unhappy ending." https://t.co/5jA3qSsT7o https://t.co/ddZcuPq3Tw— Willie Geist (@WillieGeist) July 24, 2018



Thus far, the effects of Trump’s trade war have been limited. Specific companies have seen consequences — for example, Harley-Davidson and Mid-Continent Nail — as have industries such as agriculture and home appliances. 
There have also been warnings that Trump’s tariffs could wipe out any positive effects of the tax cuts the GOP passed in 2017. The conservative-leaning Tax Foundation estimates that Trump’s enacted and proposed tariffs completely reverse the tax bill’s positive effects on the labor force. It estimates the tariffs enacted so far will reduce wages by 0.04 percent and eliminate more than 48,000 jobs. If the White House enacts every tariff it’s threatened, it would reduce wages by 0.26 percent and slash 277,000 jobs.
In other words, tariffs aren’t as “great” as Trump wants everyone to think. And just because the stock market is up (it’s gained significantly since Trump’s inauguration but is actually relatively flat this year) and the economy is good doesn’t mean Trump has “play money” to work with.
Mark Zandi, the chief economist with Moody’s Analytics, in an email weighed in on Trump’s assertion that things are so good right now that it’s time to get aggressive on trade. The president’s view is “deeply vexed,” Zandi said. “The economy is strong, but only because it is being temporarily juiced up by deficit-financed tax cuts and increases in government spending. He is borrowing money to pay for the trade war. Ironically, he is borrowing the money in part from the very countries he is fighting with (e.g., China, Japan, Canada, Europe).”
The United States’ trading partners don’t appear to be backing down; instead, they’ve hit the US with retaliatory tariffs. The rhetoric isn’t cooling down either, with Trump declaring Europe one of America’s biggest “foes” just this month. 
The trade war “will almost certainly diminish the US position as the center of the global economy and financial system,” Zandi said. “Trump’s trade war may become his Vietnam if he doesn’t rethink things soon.”



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Politics















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













