



Trump delegates in Illinois with “Muslim-sounding” names didn’t do as well as white ones - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Trump delegates in Illinois with “Muslim-sounding” names didn’t do as well as white ones

A quirk of the Illinois primary — and his supporters' aversion to voting for a man named Nabi Fakroddin — could have cost Trump a delegate.


    
      By
      
Dara Lind



  Mar 16, 2016, 10:50am EDT









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Trump delegates in Illinois with “Muslim-sounding” names didn’t do as well as white ones












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Trump supporters at an Illinois rally.
Scott Olson/Getty



Donald Trump won the Illinois primary last night. But he didn't get as many delegates as he could have — and it might be because his supporters were averse to voting for people with the last names Sadiq and Fakroddin.
Raja Sadiq and Nabi Fakroddin both ran as delegates for Trump in Trump-friendly districts. And because of Illinois's strange voting rules, both their names were on the ballot as well as Trump's.
But while Trump carried both districts Tuesday, both Sadiq and Fakroddin got many fewer votes than other delegates (with European-sounding names) running under the Trump banner. And in Fakroddin's case, at least, it kept him — and the Trump campaign — from winning a delegate slot.
We don't know the exact reason for Sadiq and Fakroddin's underperformance, which was first noticed by elections analyst Dave Wasserman of the Cook Political Report. And it's unlikely to alter the fate of the 2016 election — it looks like it only swayed the result in one race, keeping Fakroddin from winning a slot at the convention alongside the other two Trump delegates in his district.
But if it's true that Trump voters allowed anti-Muslim sentiment to override their loyalty to the candidate, that's a bad sign for the Trump campaign — a sign that it still might not understand or be able to control the Islamophobia it's unleashed.
Why were delegate names on the ballot to begin with?
To understand how this happened, you need to understand how the Illinois GOP primaries work.
In most primaries, voters vote directly for a candidate. Then if the candidate receives enough votes, delegates who are pledged to that candidate are selected to go to the party convention.
In Illinois, it's a little different. Fewer than a quarter of the state's delegates are assigned to whichever candidate gets the most statewide votes. For the rest, voters vote directly for delegates themselves.
Each presidential campaign runs a slate of delegates pledged to that candidate in each congressional district. Each delegate is listed on the ballot alongside the name of the candidate he or she is pledged to, and voters pick a certain number of delegates from each district (usually three).
So a voter yesterday who liked both Donald Trump and John Kasich could vote for two of Trump's delegates and one of Kasich's.
As it turns out, plenty of congressional districts split their delegates. According to the Green Papers, Trump swept the delegate slots in nine districts (out of 18), and Ted Cruz and Kasich each swept 1. But in the other seven districts, voters selected two delegates from one campaign and one delegate from another.
So split-ticket voting isn't that unusual. But there's still reason to believe something weird happened with the two Trump delegates with "Muslim-sounding" names. Here's why.
Sadiq and Fakroddin both got thousands fewer votes than other Trump delegates
Nabi Fakroddin has some history in Illinois state politics. He was appointed by Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner to the Illinois Human Rights Commission; he was also on the Regional Transit Authority but had to resign rather than serving on both commissions at once.
He ran as a Trump delegate in Illinois's sixth congressional district, in the western suburbs of Chicago. But he only got about five votes for every six that the other two Trump-pledged delegates received. And that was enough to cost him the third delegate slot in the district:










The results in Illinois's Republican presidential primary, sixth district.
Screenshot by CBS Local Chicago; annotation by Dara Lind/Vox


In the 13th congressional district, which includes Champaign, the split is a little less clear. Only one of Trump's delegates cracked the top three there; neither Raja Sadiq, who's a family physician and longtime Republican donor, nor fellow Trump delegate Toni Gauen made the cut. But the gap between Gauen, in fifth place, and Sadiq in sixth was as big as the gap between the first-place Trump delegate and Gauen.










The results in Illinois's Republican presidential primary, 13th district.
Screenshot via CBS Local Chicago; annotation by Dara Lind/Vox


Sadiq only got 85 percent of the vote total Gauen got, and only 75 percent of the votes that leading Trump delegate Doug Hartmann got.
We genuinely do not know why Sadiq and Fakroddin got fewer votes than their fellow Trump delegates. The only evidence we have that they were discriminated against because of their names is, well, the names themselves — and the vote totals.
But in a primary where two-thirds of Republican voters said that Muslims should be banned from entering the US — a policy position first advanced by Donald Trump — Islamophobia is definitely running high. And there is at least a possibility that the fears of Muslims that Trump's campaign has helped stoke are powerful enough, at least in some fraction of Trump supporters, that even seeing the name "Trump" next to a name that sounds foreign isn't enough to win those voters' support.
A look at the mentality of Trump supporters






Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        The Latest















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













