



After the killing of a British MP, it’s time to admit violence has a misogyny problem - Vox
























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











After the killing of a British MP, it’s time to admit violence has a misogyny problem



    
      By
      
Emily Crockett@emilycrockett



  Jun 17, 2016,  2:40pm EDT









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
After the killing of a British MP, it’s time to admit violence has a misogyny problem












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Photo by Dan Kitwood/Getty Images



The United Kingdom is reeling from the news that Jo Cox, a Labour Party member of Parliament, was fatally shot and stabbed on Thursday. It’s a horrific act of violence in an already-horrific week of violence following the Orlando shooting in the US.
In the wake of the killing, this tweet clearly struck a nerve and was widely shared:


Female MPs get daily death and rape threats: "It's just online, why can't you ignore it?". Female MP is murdered: "An unexpected tragedy."
— Beth Murray (@bmbm) June 16, 2016



We don’t yet know the assassin’s motivation. Suspect Thomas Mair has been linked to a US-based Neo-Nazi group, the National Alliance. There are unconfirmed reports that Mair shouted "Britain first!" before attacking Cox, a reference to the hotly debated "Brexit" referendum on whether Great Britain should leave the European Union, which Cox vocally opposed. Cox was also a strong supporter of helping Syrian refugees. Officials are also investigating National Action, a white supremacist group that has campaigned for Britain to leave the European Union.
"It’s an attack on democracy, what happened yesterday; it’s the well of hatred that killed her," said Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn.
But whatever the killer’s specific motivations, Beth Murray’s tweet resonated with people who take online harassment of women seriously and are frustrated that many, including law enforcement agencies, often do not.
Her words also speak to the powerful role that male hatred and misogyny plays in varying degrees for women in power. Several women in Parliament have been subjected to vicious misogynistic attacks on Twitter — including one MP, Jess Phillips, who received 600 rape threats in one night. The incidents have fueled criticism that Twitter isn’t doing enough to protect users from harassment.
Cox herself had experienced such harassment, and her security was reportedly increased after a three-month campaign of harassing messages against her. One man was cautioned by police for sending her "malicious communications of a sexual nature," but he wasn’t the suspect. Police also said that there was no known link between the harassing messages and the attack on Cox.
While police determine the killer’s possible political motivations for the attack, we shouldn’t ignore the likely role of pure hatred in it, and the role that hateful misogyny too often plays in attacks like these.
In 2011, US Congress member Gabrielle Giffords was shot and nearly killed by Jared Loughner, who reportedly had sexist views and believed that women shouldn’t be in power. Giffords was Loughner’s local representative, as Cox was Mair’s.
Orlando shooter Omar Mateen, Planned Parenthood shooter Robert Lewis Dear, and numerous other men who committed lethal high-profile mass shootings were also reported to have private histories of brutal domestic violence and sexual assault. And as I reported for Vox this week, most "mass shootings" as typically defined by news outlets are actually domestic violence attacks, often against women or children.
Every high-profile shooting has unique circumstances, and every killer has different motivations. But extreme misogyny is such a common thread in so many of them that we can no longer ignore its role in public violence.

Correction: The original headline of this article referred to Cox as a British "PM." She was a member of Parliament, or MP — not PM, which stands for Prime Minister. We regret the error.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 






    In This Stream
  
Brexit: The UK is finally leaving the European Union


What broke Britain?


After the killing of a British MP, it’s time to admit violence has a misogyny problem


The best explanation I’ve seen of how politicians like Trump feed violence



    View all 167 stories
  




    Next Up In
    
        Politics















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













