



Super Bowl 2017: Here’s how you can stream the game - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Super Bowl 2017: Here’s how you can stream the game

It’s easy! But it’s easier to watch it on TV. So here’s a guide.


    
      By
      
Peter Kafka



  Feb  2, 2017,  6:00am EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Super Bowl 2017: Here’s how you can stream the game












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Elsa / Getty Images






Peter Kafka
        covers media and technology, and their intersection, at Vox. Many of his stories can be found in his Kafka on Media newsletter, and he also hosts the Recode Media podcast.
      




The Super Bowl starts at 6:30 pm ET this Sunday, Feb. 5. Most people will watch the New England Patriots play the Atlanta Falcons the old-fashioned way — on TV, where Fox will broadcast the game.
But do you want to stream the Super Bowl instead? No problem: Fox will stream the game, for free, at FoxSportsGo.com. You can also use a free Fox Sports Go app to watch the game on iOS, Android and Amazon tablets — but not phones — as well as connected TV devices including Apple TV, Roku, Chromecast and Xbox. 
And don’t worry, cord-cutters: Just like last year, when CBS streamed the game, you won’t need a pay TV subscription to watch.
You want more options? Fine: If you’re a Verizon customer, you can watch the game on your phone, via the NFL app.
And if you have a subscription to a streaming TV service, you may also be able to watch the game there, though that will likely depend on what city you live in. Sling TV customers who have Sling’s “Blue” package can watch the game — but only if they live in Atlanta, Austin, Charlotte, Chicago, Dallas-Ft. Worth, Detroit, Gainesville, Houston, Los Angeles, Minneapolis, New York, Orlando, Philadelphia, Phoenix, San Francisco, Tampa or Washington, D.C.
AT&T’s DirecTV Now service, meanwhile, will stream the game to people in a slightly smaller set of cities: Atlanta, Austin, Charlotte, Dallas-Ft. Worth, Detroit, Gainesville, L.A., Minneapolis, New York, Orlando, Philadelphia, Phoenix, San Francisco, Tampa and Washington, D.C.
Confusing, right? Here’s the bigger issue for most people who want to stream the game: The internet really isn’t set up to stream live sports. I explained why last year.
That doesn’t mean it won’t work — last year’s CBS stream worked very nicely, after some initial hiccups — but you may have to work a little harder to watch something most people watch just by sitting on their couch and hitting a button.
What’s that? You really, really want to stream the Super Bowl, and you don’t want to hear from naysayers? Fine. Here’s a list of hints I compiled last year, when we went through this same exercise. Good luck, and go Falcons:


Make sure your broadband is broadband. Sling advises its streaming customers to have an internet connection with speeds of five megabits per second or more — not advertised speeds, real speeds — but you’ll almost certainly want more if you expect a good picture. The FCC now defines broadband as speeds of 25 Mbps or more, and if you don’t have that, chances are you’re probably not the kind of person who would think about streaming the game anyway.

Claim your broadband. You probably know this, too, but if you’re going to stream the game, you should be the only one in your place streaming anything, because you don’t want Fox’s bits to compete with anyone else’s bits. Tell your kids they’ll have to watch Netflix before or after the game. Ask your bored friends who came over to watch the game to refrain from using bandwidth-hogging apps like Snapchat or Instagram — or, at least, kick them off your Wi-Fi if they insist.

Think about ditching your Wi-Fi. Moving the stream from your wireless router to your Apple TV creates another way to lose data. “For all the times that people complain about streaming services, so many times it’s about the Wi-Fi in their home,” said streaming TV analyst Dan Rayburn. He suggests solving that by simply plugging your streaming box directly into your router with an ethernet cable.

Fix your Wi-Fi, at least. If you insist on going cordless, you can at least try to improve your signal. This Wi-Fi guide from Comcast has all sorts of advice you would normally never follow, like sticking your router in the middle of a room in the middle of your house. But! You might think about it for a few hours on Sunday.

Convince your neighbors to keep the cord. No matter how much broadband you pay for, you’re ultimately going to end up sharing capacity with your neighbors, whether you like it or not — that’s why you may often see speeds drop in the evening, when more of you are likely to be streaming Netflix or YouTube. So if you live around a lot of other people who are trying to stream stuff on Sunday, you may have a harder time watching the game. Worth thinking about if you live in Atlanta or Boston, where it’s reasonable to assume that broadband usage will be spiking this weekend.

Finally, an alternate method that may make you just as happy as a stream:
Ditch the Web and use an antenna. Doing so could provide you (depending on your geography) with a crystal-clear HD signal, without ever having to use terms like “buffering.” The Wirecutter says you can get a really good indoor antenna that won’t look insanely ugly for as little as $10, but if you’re reading this now, it’s probably too late to order one. 






Subscribe to the Recode Newsletter






                Sign up for our Recode Daily newsletter to get the top tech and business news stories delivered to your inbox.
            



Go







Watch: Why you can’t call it the Super Bowl




This article originally appeared on Recode.net.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Technology















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













