



The social soapbox: Democrats will embrace visual platforms at the 2016 Convention - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











The social soapbox: Democrats will embrace visual platforms at the 2016 Convention

Campaigns still largely use social media like they use television — by talking to the voters rather than with them.


    
      By
      
Andrew Binns and Apu Gupta



  Jul 21, 2016,  8:00am EDT









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
The social soapbox: Democrats will embrace visual platforms at the 2016 Convention












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Hillary Clinton campaigns in Las Vegas, June 19, 2016.
Brad Zucroff



In 2008, a relatively unknown young U.S. senator running for president fundamentally changed political campaigns in this country. Barack Obama’s election in 2008, as the first social media president, marked the moment at which political campaigning began the significant shift from the television to the digital age.
Social media platforms have since become the modern-day soapbox, providing new channels through which candidates and parties engage with voters. For evidence of the digital revolution, just follow the money. In the 2012 election cycle, political campaigns spent $159 million on digital media. In 2016, that figure is expected to top $1 billion.
However, campaigns still largely use social media like they use television — by talking to the voters rather than with them. The 2016 Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia will change that in a way that should make every party, candidate and campaign manager sit up and take notice.
Barack Obama’s election in 2008, as the first social media president, marked the moment at which political campaigning began the significant shift from the television to the digital age.
This year, the Democratic National Convention will bring supporters into the conversation and tell the story of this historic event through the eyes of the attendees. Understanding that communication in this digital age is becoming increasingly visual, the convention will take the images captured by attendees and connect those images to other relevant information that supporters may be on the lookout for.
Layering in this information and making all of these images "intelligent" will transform each image into an opportunity to engage supporters beyond the convention hall and lead them to information and action like never before. What’s more, the convention will track the performance of each image, and use that data to guide decisions about messaging.
To do this, the convention will partner with Curalate, a marketing technology company that works with leading brands, as the convention understands the power this technology can provide to its platform and audience. The most innovative consumer brands in the world understand that discovery of their products increasingly happens visually through images and videos. The same is becoming true of how voters consume information about political parties and campaigns as visual platforms begin to dominate social media.
While it’s highly likely that the dominant digital platform in the 2020 presidential election is still in the wireframing stage, you can bet that it will be based on visual content.
Instagram didn’t even exist when President Obama took office — now it has half a billion users, up more than 600 percent since 2012. Snapchat currently boasts 150 million daily users and 10 billion videos viewed every day. And while it’s highly likely that the dominant digital platform in the 2020 presidential election is still in the wireframing stage, you can bet that it’ll be based on visual content.
In 2016, voters will discover information about candidates and parties online through imagery to a greater extent than ever before. By using the latest technology and data available to consumer brands, the Democratic National Convention will be the most digitally engaged political event in history, and will demonstrate its commitment to innovation and to creating more compelling experiences for supporters.
By taking full advantage of technology partners like Curalate, the convention will reach more people with more compelling, relevant content, and will transform a fleeting moment of discovery — when a person sees an image — into an opportunity, offering them more information and engaging them, welcoming them to join the whole country in the biggest conversation of the year.

Andrew Binns is the chief innovation officer of the 2016 Democratic National Convention, which will be held July 25-28 in Philadelphia. Reach him @binns.
Apu Gupta is the co-founder and CEO of Curalate, a leading marketing technology company and official technology provider to the 2016 Democratic National Convention. Reach him @apugupta.
This article originally appeared on Recode.net.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Technology















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













