



South Korea has a message for Trump: hold off on military tests until after the Olympics - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











South Korea has a message for Trump: hold off on military tests until after the Olympics

This is about North Korea.


    
      By
      
Alex Ward@AlexWardVox



  Dec 20, 2017,  1:20pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
South Korea has a message for Trump: hold off on military tests until after the Olympics












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















A US and South Korea joint military training exercise in December.
Chung Sung-Jun/Getty Images



Next year’s Winter Olympics are set to take place in Pyeongchang, South Korea, roughly 50 miles from the border with North Korea. Given how tense the nuclear standoff between the US and North Korea has gotten in recent months, many fear that North Korea might try to disrupt the games with an attack or other provocative behavior like a nuclear test.
To try to avoid that outcome, South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in, is pushing the US to postpone its annual joint military drills with South Korea until after the Olympics.
The US and South Korea hold joint military drills every spring to maintain readiness in case of potential war with North Korea and to demonstrate their military strength and resolve. One of the biggest is “Foal Eagle,” which this past year included around 30,000 US and South Korean troops who jointly practiced air, sea, and special operations from March to April. 
North Korea usually perceives these exercises as preparation for an invasion, and usually responds pretty harshly every time.
South Korea is rightly worried about what North Korea could do before or during the Olympics, since Pyongyang already has a deadly track record. In 1987, North Korean agents bombed Korean Airlines Flight 858, killing all 115 people onboard. The attack was meant to deter attendees at the 1988 Seoul Olympics. 
But if President Donald Trump were to accept Moon’s offer, it’s entirely possible that North Korea would see the move as a sign of good faith and decide not to take any action around the Olympics to reignite tensions.
Trump likely won’t accept the proposal
China and North Korea consistently have advocated for a “freeze for freeze” plan, in which Pyongyang would stop improving its nuclear and missile programs if the US and South Korea — and potentially Japan — stopped conducting military exercises together. Trump, however, has consistently rejected that proposal. 
Retired Lt. Gen. Chip Gregson, the Pentagon’s top Asia official from 2009 to 2011, is also skeptical of Moon’s suggestion. “What does North Korea do in return?” he told me in an interview. “If it is nothing worthwhile, then it is not a good idea to preemptively compromise in the hope that it will somehow cause a change in North Korea’s actions. We would be extending an olive branch in response to North Korean and Chinese intimidation.”
A Pentagon spokesperson declined to say if there are currently plans to pause the upcoming drills with South Korea, saying only that “it would be inappropriate to discuss plans for future exercises at this time.”
In the Tuesday interview with NBC News, South Korean president Moon said, “I hope that this Olympics will be able to promote the peace between the North and South Korea and become an Olympics for peace.”
Whether Trump, who so far hasn’t shown much willingness to deescalate tensions with North Korea, is willing to help Moon make that happen remains to be seen.




Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        World Politics















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













