



Today in Obamacare: why Republicans have a much tougher task than Obama did - Vox

























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Today in Obamacare: why Republicans have a much tougher task than Obama did



    
      By
      
Andrew Prokop



  Feb 21, 2017,  2:30pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Today in Obamacare: why Republicans have a much tougher task than Obama did












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Erik McGregor/Pacific Press/LightRocket via Getty






Andrew Prokop
        is a senior politics correspondent at Vox, covering the White House, elections, and political scandals and investigations. He’s worked at Vox since the site’s launch in 2014, and before that, he worked as a research assistant at the New Yorker’s Washington, DC, bureau.
      




Members of Congress meeting constituents in their district this week are likely to encounter an unusual dynamic: Obamacare supporters who suddenly seem to outnumber the law’s opponents.
The New York Times’s Jonathan Martin wrote this weekend about a new reality dawning on congressional Republicans: Constituents who dislike Obamacare are no longer anywhere near as vocal as they used to be, while the health law’s supporters are suddenly more energized than ever.
Many have remarked on how this seems to be a mirror image of 2009, when the Tea Party became far more mobilized in opposition to Democrats’ health reform legislation than supporters were. And it’s also, of course, worth remembering that Democrats forged onward with health reform regardless of these prominent protests.
But there’s also a crucially important difference between the two situations: The 2009 Democratic proposal planned to give out new benefits, while GOP proposals for Obamacare repeal today would instead put existing benefits at risk. In practice, the politics of those respective scenarios have tended to play out very differently. Yes, a new law giving people stuff — in the form of either new benefits or tax cuts — can be controversial and difficult to pass. 
Messing with the stuff people are already getting has tended to be exponentially more controversial, though, because it’s more actively harmful. Simply put, politicians of all stripes are more eager to go out on a limb to help their voters rather than to support something they believe will harm them.
Remember the fate of Bush’s Social Security plan
For a reminder of how this has worked, just think back to the last time Republicans had control of both the White House and Congress — from 2003 to 2006, under George W. Bush. 
Though GOP rhetoric has often focused on the need to cut spending, Bush had his greatest domestic legislative successes in his first term, when he focused on giving people stuff. Namely, he enacted two big rounds of tax cuts and the Medicare Part D prescription drug benefit. None of those victories came easy — Republicans were forced to scale back their second round of tax cuts, and the final House vote on Medicare in 2003 was famously controversial. Still, all of them ended up passing in the end.
But fresh off his reelection to a second term, Bush decided to make a bold proposal to overhaul the existing Social Security program by partially privatizing it. This did not end well for him.
I recapped this story at greater length in an article back in January. Overall, though the defeat of Social Security reform had many elements — administration missteps, a unified Democratic opposition, and so on — the most important one is that the proposal, at its core, was about messing with the benefits people were already getting. 
Politicians looked for feedback from their constituents on Bush’s plan, and what they heard was so negative that even moderate red-state Democrats temperamentally inclined toward bipartisanship, like then-Sen. Max Baucus of Montana, decided the plan was a loser. By early February, New York Times reporter Robin Toner could report on “a general anxiety attack in the Republican center over Social Security.” Eventually, all the major players became convinced it couldn’t pass, and the centerpiece of Bush’s second-term domestic agenda was never even brought to a vote. 
Obamacare’s situation now isn’t a perfect parallel here. It’s a much younger program than Social Security, and there’s a stronger case that the exchanges may be in some trouble and in need of an imminent overhaul. 
Plus, Obamacare repeal has been the centerpiece of Republican messaging for years, whereas Social Security privatization was never more than a minor issue during the 2000 and 2004 campaigns. Still, as Martin’s story suggests, this GOP base enthusiasm may have ebbed, and it’s worth keeping the fate of Social Security reform in mind. 
Today’s top health policy and politics stories


Andrew Joseph of Stat News reports on Nathaniel Rankin of Missouri, a young boy with serious breathing conditions who depends on Medicaid for his expensive care. “Medicaid covers a far more diverse population than is typically recognized; with more than 70 million beneficiaries, it is the largest insurer in the country,” Joseph writes. “The big fear for the Rankins is that Nathaniel could lose access to his care or have it interrupted with the potential Medicaid changes.”
At the Federalist, Christopher Jacobs has a conservative reaction to the latest House GOP Obamacare plan that’s circulating. While praising some aspects of the plan, he is worried about the reports that they’ll fund it by capping the tax exclusion for employer-sponsored health insurance, which he deems a tax increase. “Going down the same failed Obamacare approach of more taxes and more spending will not lower health costs,” he writes.
The Huffington Post’s Jonathan Cohn has a piece on how Trump is governing that isn’t explicitly about Obamacare but could have important implications for the health fight. Specifically, Cohn writes that Trump has been completely uninterested in putting together a specific infrastructure plan, which makes a stark contrast to how President Obama approached the stimulus. “Trump has no apparent patience for the boring, slow work of politics ― like developing detailed policy plans, or working them out with congressional leaders,” Cohn writes. “And without that kind of unglamorous work, getting stuff done turns out to be awfully difficult.”

Caitlin Owens of Axios reports that the Treasury Department wasn’t represented at the administration’s Obamacare strategy meeting this weekend — which is odd, since the GOP’s replacement plan hinges on tax policy. “A source who heard about the snub from a White House economic adviser said the department feels shut out of the process,” Owens writes. Her source tells her, “There's always tension between health policy folks and economic policy folks in any administration, but this is an entirely different level.”




Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Politics















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













