



Conspiracy theories flourished after the Parkland shooting. Here’s why. - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Conspiracy theories flourished after the Parkland shooting. Here’s why.

The theorists aren’t afraid of the truth. They’re afraid of where it leads.


    
      By
      
Brian Resnick@B_resnick



  Feb 26, 2018, 12:10pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Conspiracy theories flourished after the Parkland shooting. Here’s why.












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Mark Wilson/Getty Images






Brian Resnick
        is Vox’s science and health editor, and is the co-creator of Unexplainable, Vox's podcast about unanswered questions in science. Previously, Brian was a reporter at Vox and at National Journal.
      




Last Wednesday, the No. 1 trending video on YouTube was based on a lie. The video alleged that David Hogg, a 17-year-old survivor of the Parkland, Florida, school shooting, was an “actor.” After the shooting, Hogg had become a compelling and sympathetic proponent of gun control, making the rounds on cable news. 
This YouTube video contained a clip of Hogg speaking on camera for a Los Angeles local news segment last summer. The video was captioned “DAVID HOGG THE ACTOR....” — the implication being that Hogg suspiciously shows up whenever news cameras are rolling.
YouTube took down the video and others like it — including one Infowars video headlined “David Hogg Can’t Remember His Lines in TV Interview.” But the video-sharing platform was hardly the only place similar conspiracy theories flourished, as Vox’s Matt Yglesias outlined. Right-wing celebrities suggest that George Soros was funding the anti-gun outcry. Elsewhere, outlets were pointing out that Hogg is the son of a retired FBI agent (the implication being that the FBI is out to get President Donald Trump). 
We’ve seen this before. After a tragedy, conspiracy theories emerge, and they are powerful, mean, and damaging.


    Related
  
The science behind why fake news is so hard to wipe out

Consider the unending hurt of the parents of children slain during the Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre. For years, they have been charged with making up the whole tragedy (including the lives of their children).
Or the agony of the family of Seth Rich, the Democratic National Committee staffer who was murdered in an apparent robbery attempt in 2016. Despite zero evidence, conspiracy theorists and conservative pundits fanned suspicions that Rich was murdered by the Clinton campaign. “Seth’s death has been turned into a political football,” Rich’s parents wrote at the Washington Post. 
Conspiracy theories are an infuriating plague on our media ecosystem. But they’re not inexplicable. We can understand why they spread so far and wide. Here are the two key reasons. 
1) Conspiracy theorizing is a type of motivated reasoning 
When it comes to political debates, we don’t use our smarts to uncover the truth. We use our smarts to protect the groups and worldview to which we adhere. This is called politically motivated reasoning, and it distorts how we see the world. 
Asheley Landrum, a Texas Tech University psychologist who has studied conspiracy theorizing, suggests this might be what’s happening among those theorizing about the Parkland students. 
“To counteract the kids’ powerful speech, a conspiracy narrative arises that allows individuals to dismiss or ignore [the kids’ perspectives],” she writes in an email. 
Why would people want to counteract the kids? Well, because of where their pleas for greater gun control might lead: to greater gun control. And in the minds of right-wing conspiracy theorists, it’s easier to dismiss the kids outright than to actually engage with their arguments.
Psychologists have found that people aren’t necessarily afraid of facts — they’re afraid of where those facts lead. This is called “solution aversion,” and it helps explain why many conservatives are wary of the science of climate change  — because many solutions to climate change involve increasing government oversight and regulations. Similarly, right-wingers may be discrediting the kids because they don’t want to see changes to gun laws. 
One crucial thing to know about motivated reasoning is that you often don’t realize you’re doing it. We automatically have an easier time remembering information that fits our worldviews. We’re simply quicker to recognize information that confirms what we already know, which makes us blind to facts that discount it.
2) Conspiracy theories are a tool to cope with a painful, uncertain world
Psychological research also finds that some people are just more prone to believing in conspiracy theories than others. And it’s not because these people are necessarily unintelligent (though being a more analytic person is correlated with being less swayed by conspiracies.) 
Instead, believing in conspiracy theories, psychological research informs us, is a coping mechanism to deal with uncertainty in the world.


    Related
  
The dark allure of conspiracy theories, explained by a psychologist

“It’s a self-protective mechanism people have,” Jan-Willem van Prooijen, a psychologist who studies conspiracy theories, told me last year. The theories are a tool by which people can feel more in control and find explanations in a scary and turbulent world.
The thought of 17 kids being gunned down at school is horrible. Why wouldn’t we seek refuge in a theory that insists it wasn’t so bad after all? 
Van Prooijen expanded on what makes people more susceptible than others to believing in the theories: 

One of them is education level. Conspiracy theories are more likely among people who are [less] educated. But this doesn’t mean that people who are highly educated are immune.
There’s also effects of political ideology. In our research, we find the more radical a person’s politics [both left- and right-wing], the more likely they are to be conspiracy theorists.
Another is collective narcissism [a personality trait where people demand the group they belong to be admired], and people who believe their own nation and group is superior to others.

People who feel powerless and who are more pessimistic are also more likely to believe in conspiracy theories, van Prooijen finds. And this is where education and outreach can help. Achieving higher levels of education correlates to feeling more secure about the world, and this, in turn, seems to protect against a conspiratorial mindset.  
Conspiracy theories are especially dangerous in the age of viral media 
Conspiracy theories aren’t new. But today they, fueled by computer algorithms that award grabbiness and not truth and deliberate misinformation campaigns, spread like wildfire. And the big tech giants are often hesitant or sluggish in taking them down. (After the shooting in Las Vegas in October, Google featured a link to an anonymous message board notorious for fueling conspiracy theories in its “top stories” module.) Plus, there are whole media outlets — like Infowars — that have built huge followings peddling junk theories. 
The theories are also dangerous because of a psychological phenomenon called the illusory truth effect. Its impact is subtle, but basically, it means that simply repeating a lie makes it more likely to be misidentified as truth. 
Each time a reader encounters a conspiracy theory on Facebook, Google, or really anywhere, it makes a subtle impression. Each time, the story grows more familiar, and that familiarity casts the illusion of truth. The more we hear a piece of information repeated, the more we’re likely to believe it. This is true for “even things that people have reason not to believe,” Gord Pennycook, a psychologist who studies misinformation at Yale University, told me last year. 
So consider this: When YouTube took down the conspiracy video last Wednesday, it had already been viewed 200,000 times.








Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 






    In This Stream
  
Parkland shooting galvanized teen gun control activists across the country


Stop blaming mental illness for mass shootings


Conspiracy theories flourished after the Parkland shooting. Here’s why.


MSNBC and CNN took the NRA’s bait on arming teachers



    View all 132 stories
  




    Next Up In
    
        Science















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













