



What the US could learn from Singapore about making teachers better - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











What the US could learn from Singapore about making teachers better



    
      By
      
Libby Nelson@libbyanelson



  Jan 15, 2016,  6:00am EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
What the US could learn from Singapore about making teachers better












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Singapore treats its teachers like adults. The US should, too.
Shutterstock






Libby Nelson
        is Vox's policy editor, leading coverage of how government action and inaction shape American life. Libby has more than a decade of policy journalism experience, including at Inside Higher Ed and Politico. She joined Vox in 2014.
      




For teachers in Singapore to advance in their career, they must make sure their students learn. They also have to help their fellow teachers get better.
This model of collaborative professional development is one way other countries are doing a better job than the United States at improving the skills of educators. While the US spends billions of dollars a year for occasional workshops on the latest technology or curriculum trends, there's almost no evidence to suggest that the model works.
A new study from the National Center on Education and the Economy explores teacher professional development in three countries with excellent education outcomes — Shanghai, Singapore, and British Columbia.
The report found that unlike in the United States, in these countries teaching is much more like other careers, where advancement is expected and interaction with other professionals is expected for growth.
If the US were able to imitate these systems, experts have argued for years, it could help attract more qualified teachers, raise test scores, and have a lifelong impact on students.
How teaching is different from other careers — and why it's a problem
There are two ways that teaching doesn't look like other jobs in the United States: The job stays pretty much the same for as long as a teacher is in the classroom, and there's little interaction with other adults. Experts argue that both are a problem when it comes to helping teachers improve.
If you started out teaching third grade 35 years ago and retired this year, your last day in the classroom easily could have looked a lot like your first. You might have been getting paid more for more years of experience, but the expertise you'd developed after decades in the classroom wasn't formally recognized.
Most professions don't work this way. Lawyers move up from first-year associate to managing partner; nurses can deepen their specialization in branches of medicine. Experts have argued for years that the lack of a similar path in teaching makes it harder to retain good teachers. The clearest path up is becoming a principal — which is essentially an entirely different job.
Teachers' skills, perhaps as a result, improve quickly in the first five years they're in the classroom. Then the research disagrees on what happens next. Some studies have found teachers plateau completely; others find they continue to improve, but not as dramatically.
"There’s no reward for getting better at it," said Marc Tucker, director of the National Center on Education and the Economy, which released the report today exploring how teachers' professional development works in Shanghai, Singapore, and British Columbia. "There’s no career in teaching. There’s no high amounts of responsibility to aspire to."
And although teachers are rarely alone, teaching in the US is a solitary profession: They spend most of their time with students, not other adults.
Compared with teachers in other countries, teachers in the US spend far more time in front of their classes, which means they have less time to work on lesson planning or collaboration. Teachers in the US teach about 27 hours per week, compared with 19 hours per week in Korea and Shanghai.
That means they have less time to discuss problems and techniques with each other and improve their skills.
"Teachers have no time to think, no time to learn, no time to study the kids, no time to study the curriculum," Elizabeth Green, the author of Building a Better Teacher, told me last year. "They have no way of seeing anything that's happening outside their own classroom."
Research has found that collaboration is key to helping teachers improve — or at least that teachers think it is. A 2007 study found a link between teacher collaboration and higher student test scores in Tennessee.
Teachers in other countries are responsible for each other's success










Photo by Suhaimi Abdullah/Getty Images


A different system of helping teachers learn on the job, already in use in Shanghai, Singapore, and British Columbia, could solve all these problems. Those systems give teachers more time to collaborate, get rid of ineffective professional development, and create a more varied career path for teachers who want to stay in the classroom.
Teachers are responsible not just for their students' learning but also for each other's. They work together to develop better lesson plans or new ways of teaching. And they constantly evaluate whether the work they're doing is paying off in the classroom.
In Singapore, an elite group of "master teachers" are responsible for helping other teachers in the school system to improve. Those teachers train mentors and other leaders within the system, who in turn work with newer teachers to develop their skills.
The system expects tangible results. The teachers set goals for what their students will learn, and if students aren't performing well they're expected to adjust. This approach, according to Tucker, turns teachers into researchers who evaluate data and change their approaches accordingly.
Teachers use four questions to guide their work: 1) What do we want students to learn? 2) How will we know they have learned it? 3) How will we respond when they don't learn? 4) How do we respond when they already know it?
Educating teachers is seen as crucially important: Teachers advance within the profession based in part on how successfully they educate each other, and schools are held accountable for helping their teachers improve.
The Singapore system, as well as similar teacher development systems in Shanghai and British Columbia, "make it very clear that the way we improve schools is to improve teaching," said Ben Jensen, the CEO of Learning First and a co-author of the new report.
But it also requires a high level of trust in teachers. "Until you’re willing to let schools try, and some of them will get it wrong, you’re not going to get the growth that’s possible," Jensen said, adding that he's not sure the system in the US has that much trust.
Unlike many reforms meant to help the US catch up with other countries, this idea wouldn't require a big, national effort.  And Tucker suspects that it wouldn't cost more than the billions of dollars that they're already spending on less effective forms of professional development.
Creating a system like Singapore's would still face huge hurdles. It would require reimagining how professional development works and, in some cases, reimagining what a teaching career looks like. It would require huge amounts of training to ensure that it's effective. While teachers unions aren't necessarily opposed to a system of master teachers, most teachers' contracts aren't set up for anything like this, and altering them would require tricky political negotiations.
Freeing up more time for teachers to collaborate also often means larger classes — common in Singapore and Shanghai but strongly resisted by American teachers
The United States is doing some experimenting










Shutterstock


One state has come further than the rest in trying to rethink how it helps its teachers improve: Iowa. A new system, backed by the teachers union, creates leadership positions for teachers, including mentoring, serving as a model of good teaching for others, or helping develop the curriculum within their school.
At a coaching session at Roosevelt Middle School in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, in September, Laura Zimmerman, who teaches students learning English, met with instructional coach Anne Ironside to talk about what was going well and poorly in her classroom. They discussed how she could change her language to reflect a "growth mindset" — the idea that intelligence isn't fixed but can be developed over time.
Ironside asked Zimmerman to pick out specific words and phrases — "effort," "perseverance," "rise to the challenge" — to encourage students who are struggling. And she asked her to pick out when in her lesson plan she might use those techniques.
"Sometimes when I give them a writing prompt … that's when they groan," Zimmerman said. Ironside asked her which students were most likely to struggle, and asked her to role-play how she would encourage those students to keep it up. They brainstormed other ways she could get students started, including model sentences and extra detail on the assignment, and scheduled Ironside's next visit to Zimmerman's classroom during a writing assignment to check up on whether the advice worked.
Feedback in Cedar Rapids used to be much more cursory: a short visit from an administrator, followed by written comments. Under the new system, teachers meet with instructional coaches, some of whom also spend part of their day in the classroom, for 15 to 30 minutes once a week.
"Teachers are saying, I haven’t ever received this much support; I’m getting more support now than I ever have," said Mary Ellen Maske, a Cedar Rapids deputy superintendent.
Iowa's model has gotten national attention: Education Secretary Arne Duncan visited Ironside and Zimmerman's coaching session on a bus tour in September and said Iowa leads the country in developing new roles for teachers.
But it's still far less sophisticated than the systems that Tucker's group highlighted. The key is a policy reform: "We need an overall strategy that says professional learning is important, we’re going to be explicit about what it looks like, and we’re going to structure policies to get that improvement," he said.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        The Latest















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













