



Obama's quiet push to ban LGBTQ discrimination in the workplace - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Obama's quiet push to ban LGBTQ discrimination in the workplace



    
      By
      
German Lopez@germanrlopez



  Jan 13, 2016, 10:30am EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Obama's quiet push to ban LGBTQ discrimination in the workplace












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















President Barack Obama gives his final State of the Union speech.
Evan Vucci/Pool via Getty Images



President Barack Obama's 2016 State of the Union speech didn't, as previous speeches did, land any firsts on LGBTQ issues. Obama didn't have any big moments like in 2012, when he became the first sitting president to support marriage equality, or in 2015, when he became the first president to say the word "transgender" in a State of the Union address. Instead, he focused on broad platforms, vaguely advocating for equality.
But his administration may be on the verge of having the most direct impact it's ever had on LGBTQ equality — by potentially fostering a legal challenge that will lead to a federal ban on discrimination in the workplace and housing.
In the US, most states' civil rights laws don't ban discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity in the workplace, housing, or public accommodations (hotels, restaurants, and other places that serve the general public).





As a result, more than half of LGBTQ Americans, according to the advocacy group Movement Advancement Project, live in a state where, under state law, an employer can legally fire someone because he's gay, a landlord can legally evict someone because she's lesbian, and a hotel manager can legally deny service to someone who's transgender — for no reason other than the person's sexual orientation or gender identity.
Banning this type of discrimination has long been a goal of LGBTQ advocates, through the push for the Employment Non-Discrimination Act. But the ban is closer than ever to happening as the Obama administration, quietly but surely, helps along a new legal interpretation of decades-old laws.
The Obama administration's work to redefine the Civil Rights Act





Advocates have long argued that the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Fair Housing Act should protect LGBTQ people from discrimination in the workplace and housing, as they do for race, color, national origin, religion, and sex.  
It's the last protection — sex — that's relevant here: Advocates say that protections against sex-based discrimination also apply to sexual orientation and gender identity, since discrimination against LGBTQ people is, fundamentally, rooted in expectations of what people of certain sexes should be like. (One caveat: These protections would not apply to public accommodations, since sex isn't covered in federal laws for that area.)
"It's pretty uncontroversial that discriminating against a man that acts too effeminate or a woman that acts too masculine is a form of sex discrimination," the ACLU's Joshua Block previously told me. "That applies to lesbians and gay men, too."
Advocates have long argued that the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Fair Housing Act should protect LGBTQ people
The federal government, under Obama, has quietly come around to this interpretation of the Civil Rights Act. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), whose five-person commission is made up of four Obama appointees, in 2012 agreed that the Civil Rights Act protects people from discrimination based on gender identity. In 2015, it expanded the protections to sexual orientation.
The US Department of Justice has similarly stated that it believes federal civil rights protections apply to gender identity, although it has yet to say the same about sexual orientation. But since EEOC is seen as an expert advisory for other federal agencies on employment issues, it's possible the Justice Department's position could change soon. (LGBTQ advocates certainly hope so; they've been pushing the Justice Department to change its stance for years.)
Why does all of this matter? Essentially, this is fostering the beginning of a big court challenge over the Civil Rights Act's reach — one that could end up at the US Supreme Court. And if that were to happen, and the Supreme Court ruled once again in favor of LGBTQ rights, it would likely be a result of support not just from LGBTQ advocates, but also from the EEOC and the Justice Department, both of which are federal agencies that are respected by the courts.
Notably, this court challenge could take a while to work up to the Supreme Court, likely until after Obama is out of office. But by planting the seeds to this challenge through his appointees to the EEOC and, possibly, a change in the Justice Department's stated legal opinion in this area, Obama and his administration could lead to yet another huge impact on LGBTQ rights.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Politics















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













