



The government official in charge of ethics just harshly condemned Trump’s plan - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











The government official in charge of ethics just harshly condemned Trump’s plan



    
      By
      
Libby Nelson@libbyanelson



  Jan 11, 2017,  6:10pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
The government official in charge of ethics just harshly condemned Trump’s plan












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email














Libby Nelson
        is Vox's policy editor, leading coverage of how government action and inaction shape American life. Libby has more than a decade of policy journalism experience, including at Inside Higher Ed and Politico. She joined Vox in 2014.
      




The nonpartisan director of the federal Office of Government Ethics ripped into President-elect Donald Trump’s plans for his businesses in an unusually public and blisteringly critical speech Wednesday afternoon. Walter Shaub went so far as to say that Trump’s conflicts of interest put democracy at risk, break with decades of tradition, and call into doubt whether Trump’s own patriotism stands up to history. 
Trump’s plan to step back from his businesses day to day is “meaningless from a conflict of interest perspective,” Shaub said in his remarks at the Brookings Institution in Washington. 
“Every president in modern times has taken the strong medicine of divestiture,” Shaub said. Trump’s plan “does not comport with the traditions of the presidency over the past 40 years.”
The president-elect announced Wednesday morning that he would hand management of the Trump Organization over to his adult sons and the company’s chief financial officer. He promised to insulate himself from his businesses by donating the profits from foreign stays at his hotel to the federal government and limiting the information he received about his profits and losses. Shaub called the structure “perplexing.” 
Trump will still know where his business interests lie. He made clear that he plans to return to his company after his presidency. Ethics experts have long contended that the only real solution is a blind trust: Trump should sell his properties and allow someone else to invest the proceeds from the sale so that he doesn’t know what he owns. Trump’s lawyer said a blind trust would, essentially, be too difficult and expensive, since it would require Trump to sell large amounts of real estate.
“The president is now entering a world of public service,” Shaub said. “He’s going to be asking his own appointees to make sacrifices. He’s going to be asking our men and women in uniform to risk their lives in conflicts around the world. So no, I don’t think divestiture is too high a price to pay to be president of the United States of America.”
The Office of Government Ethics has hammered out hundreds, if not thousands, of divestiture agreements involving federal officials. They have had to “divest assets, break open trusts, and dissolve businesses,” Shaub said, and taking those steps can be expensive and painful.
But, Shaub said, “their basic patriotism usually prevails as they agree to set aside their personal interests to serve their country’s interests.” When officials were reluctant to take the required steps, the ethics office’s demands were backed up by “the unwavering example of presidents who resolved their own conflicts of interest.”
Presidents in the past didn’t just set an example for the rest of their administration, Shaub said. They helped the American system of government set an example for the world on avoiding corruption. 
Trump is asking his Cabinet members to meet higher standards than he is

The Office of Government Ethics is charged with ensuring there are no conflicts of interest. Its employees search through thousands of pages of financial disclosures and reach agreements with would-be Cabinet nominees, as well as lower-level officials, stating the steps they’ll take to make sure their private investments and public duties don’t conflict.
It’s a relatively obscure, generally apolitical agency, and Shaub — who was a career public servant in the office before being appointed by President Obama in 2013 to his first five-year term as director — is far from a public figure. 
His decision to make a public speech criticizing the incoming president-elect was highly unusual. But emails between the Trump transition team and the ethics office showed that Trump has had little regard for the office’s work since he came into office. For 10 days after the election, offers of assistance and guidance on ensuring an ethical transition were rebuffed.
Nor did Trump’s lawyers run their plans past Shaub. If they had, he said, he would have told them it was very possible for the president to sell his real estate assets, and that other officials in the past have done so. 
As for Trump’s other justification — that the president “can’t have a conflict of interest” — that’s nonsense, Shaub said. 
“A conflict of interest is anything that creates an incentive to put your own interest before the interests of the people you serve,” Shaub said, quoting a Supreme Court decision from 1961 that called conflicts of interest “an evil which endangers the very fabric of democratic society.”
If anything, Shaub said, it’s more important for presidents to avoid conflicts of interest: “The potential for corruption only grows with the increase in power.”



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Politics















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













