



Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg Appalled by Marc Andreessen's Appalling Comments About India - Vox

























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg Appalled by Marc Andreessen's Appalling Comments About India

Mark Zuckerberg is not at all thrilled with his company's longtime board member Marc Andreessen. Not. One. Bit.


    
      By
      
Kurt Wagner



  Feb 10, 2016,  3:51pm EST









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg Appalled by Marc Andreessen's Appalling Comments About India












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Shutterstock



Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg is not at all thrilled with his company’s longtime board member Marc Andreessen. Not. One. Bit.
That’s because Andreessen stuck his foot in his mouth late Tuesday night when, while philosophizing on Twitter, he compared Facebook’s Free Basics service in India to colonialism and suggested that Indians are setting themselves up for economic ruin by resisting Facebook’s “help.”
The tweets were inappropriate, and a lot of people were quick to call him out. Andreessen, who joined Facebook’s board in 2008, has since deleted the original tweet (which you can read below) and apologized multiple times in his now famous tweetstorm style.
Still, Facebook and Zuckerberg are quickly trying to distance themselves from the comments. In a post Wednesday afternoon, hours after a company spokesperson said that Facebook “strongly rejected” Andreessen’s comments, Zuckerberg wrote: “I found the comments deeply upsetting, and they do not represent the way Facebook or I think at all.”
He continued: “Facebook stands for helping to connect people and giving them voice to shape their own future. But to shape the future we need to understand the past.”
Zuckerberg has spent a lot of time and energy trying to bring Free Basics to India. It’s a pet project of his, and he made a public trip to India and hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi at Facebook headquarters in 2015.
https://twitter.com/KurtWagner8/status/697496625074180096
Free Basics provides a set of Internet services, including Facebook, free of charge to users, but doesn’t provide access to everything on the Internet. Regulators and critics argue that it violates the concept of net neutrality, which is why it’s currently banned in the country.
What’s particularly tough about Andreessen’s comments is that many Free Basics opponents believe that Facebook’s free Internet plan will stifle Indian innovation by promoting established, existing services instead of allowing local Indian services to grow. The thinking is that Free Basics will allow an American gatekeeper (Facebook) to pick the winners and losers.
Here’s Andreessen’s original tweet that sparked all the outrage.










Twitter


And here’s Zuckerberg’s full post.

This article originally appeared on Recode.net.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Technology















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













