



How tech workers in the government could make everyone’s life easier: ‘Get rid of the paper’ - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











How tech workers in the government could make everyone’s life easier: ‘Get rid of the paper’

On the latest episode of Recode Decode, U.S. Digital Service Acting Administrator Matt Cutts shares his pitch for paperless visa applications and more.


    
      By
      
Eric Johnson@HeyHeyESJ


            
                Updated
            
            
  Jul  2, 2018, 10:19am EDT









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
How tech workers in the government could make everyone’s life easier: ‘Get rid of the paper’












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Anthony Devlin / Getty



“We’re not doing anything with blockchain,” said Matt Cutts, the acting administrator of the U.S. Digital Service. For now, at least, the tech-focused division of the White House’s Office of Management and Budget is focused on the more basic ways that technology can make Americans’ interactions with the government user-friendly.
“I am less worried about machine learning, I am less worried about artificial intelligence or the blockchain,” Cutts said on the latest episode of Recode Decode, hosted by Kara Swisher. “I am more worried about the veteran who calls the VA every single day at 9 am.”
Cutts, who spent nearly 17 years at Google before joining the USDS in 2017, said that’s not a rhetorical example. There really was a veteran, named Charles, who was calling every day to check in on the status of a disability claim appeal.
“All we did was implement a progress bar so that he knows where he stands out of 100,000-plus veterans,” Cutts said. “So even though he knows he might have a two-and-a-half-year-plus wait, just knowing where you stand in that queue makes you heard and respected and valued.”
He urged tech workers to consider a temporary tour of duty in the government because applying Silicon Valley’s “agile practices” to things like veterans’ benefits or Medicare can make a huge difference in people’s lives. And contrary to what some might expect, he said the USDS’ work has remained just as nonpartisan under President Trump as it was under President Obama.
“There is so much good work to be done — high-impact work that can help a regular person get access to the sorts of government services that they need to have,” Cutts said.
You can listen to Recode Decode on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Pocket Casts, Overcast or wherever you listen to podcasts.

On the new podcast, Cutts did propose one big idea that could help everyone, both those working in government and everyday citizens: “Get rid of paper.”
“I would be extremely ecstatic,” he said. “For example, H-1B visas. Millions of pieces of paper are shipped to a place, which then does a lottery, and ships all that paper back to the people who lost in the lottery. If you could just start with a preregistraton page that was digital ...”
“We’re kind of used to seeing these pictures of supervisors’ offices with stacks and stacks up to the ceiling, which are unsearchable,” Cutts added. “Some people think they can do better by scanning or faxing stuff in, and then having an electronic version of that. The fact is, it needs to be digital-native from the beginning. That’s how it’s searchable, that’s how you can really check for errors.”
If you like this show, you should also sample our other podcasts:


Recode Media with Peter Kafka features no-nonsense conversations with the smartest and most interesting people in the media world, with new episodes every Thursday. Use these links to subscribe on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Pocket Casts, Overcast or wherever you listen to podcasts.
On Too Embarrassed to Ask, also hosted by Kara Swisher, we answer the tech questions sent in by our readers and listeners. You can hear new episodes every Friday on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, Pocket Casts, Overcast or wherever you listen to podcasts.

If you like what we’re doing, please write a review on Apple Podcasts — and if you don’t, just tweet-strafe Kara.

This article originally appeared on Recode.net.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Technology















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













