



Kubo and the Two Strings is a gorgeous stop-motion homage to Kurosawa and the power of stories - Vox



























































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes
mobile








Vox homepage











Give
Give


Newsletters
Newsletters



Site search

Search
Search





Vox main menu



              Explainers
              
                




              Crossword
              
              



              Video
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Politics
              
              



              Policy
              
              



              Culture
              
              



              Science
              
              



              Technology
              
              



              Climate
              
              



              Health
              
              



              Money
              
              



              Future Perfect
              
              



              Life
              
              



              Newsletters
              
              



            More
            


















            Explainers
            
              





                          Abortion ruling
                        



                          Twitter changes
                        



                          Trump indictment
                        





                          AI
                        



                          China
                        



                          HBO’s Succession
                        



All explainers





            Crossword
            
          



            Video
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Politics
            
          



            Policy
            
          



            Culture
            
          



            Science
            
          



            Technology
            
          



            Climate
            
          



            Health
            
          



            Money
            
          



            Future Perfect
            
          



            Life
            
          



            Newsletters
            
          

x








      We have a request
    

We're aiming to add 1,500 new contributions this month to help keep Vox free for everyone. Will you chip in? 
×











Kubo and the Two Strings is a gorgeous stop-motion homage to Kurosawa and the power of stories



    
      By
      
Aja Romano@ajaromano



  Aug 19, 2016, 11:00am EDT









Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
Kubo and the Two Strings is a gorgeous stop-motion homage to Kurosawa and the power of stories












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















LAIKA






Aja Romano
        is a culture reporter for Vox, focusing on criticism and the ethics of culture. Before joining Vox in 2016, they were a staff reporter at the Daily Dot.
      




"If you must blink, do it now."
So begins the gripping and gorgeous story of Kubo and the Two Strings, the latest film from the Oregon-based stop-motion animation studio Laika and an early comer for the best animated film of the year (and one of the best films of the year, period). A quintessential hero’s journey set in a dreamy, folkloric Japan, Kubo is a story about stories, told with a sophistication that never gets in the way of its straightforward earnestness or its stunning visuals.
It’s also fully self-aware: The film knows that blinking is the last thing you’ll want to do while watching it.




Rating

4.5




 










LAIKA


Kubo and the Two Strings is the story of a young boy, Kubo (voiced by Game of Thrones’ Rickon Stark, Art Parkinson), who has a very special ability: the powerful inherited gift of magic-infused storytelling.
The stories Kubo weaves for the spellbound audience in his small village and the magic he culls by playing his three-stringed shamisen are wondrous, but Kubo knows little about the extent of his powers. Instead, he spends most of his time caring for his convalescent mother, who never fully recovered from the death of Kubo’s father years ago, in an accident that cost Kubo one of his eyes.
Kubo doesn’t know what parts of the stories his mother tells him of his past, and of his mysterious family origins, are real — or why she insists that he never be caught outside of their tiny house after sundown. Soon he finds himself being pursued by his grandfather, the sinister Moon King, and his malevolent aunts, who slink through the sky like white-faced kabuki ghosts.
To help him escape, his mother awakens the magic of a charmed snow monkey (Charlize Theron) and sends him on a journey to find a magical suit of armor that once belonged to his samurai father. A giant talking beetle, voiced by Matthew McConaughey of all people, is a surprisingly endearing, if mostly useless, addition to their troupe.
But this is just the superficial quest. The real quest, the heart of Kubo’s journey, is a search for family, and perhaps even more, to find the truth behind every story. In this way, as well as in its nods to legendary Japanese filmmaker Akira Kurosawa, Kubo is a Rashomon for the whole family: a tale that examines its own multiplicity and gently reminds us that every story looks different depending on who’s telling it.
Laika has gained a cult following over the past decade for its painstakingly wrought stop-motion animation and the vivid storytelling of its popular films Coraline and ParaNorman (and its less popular, but still excellent, The Boxtrolls). The studio's CEO, Travis Knight, who served as lead animator for those films, makes his directorial debut with Kubo, working with a story by longtime industry artist Shannon Tindle and a script by Marc Haimes and ParaNorman writer Chris Butler.
Knight’s direction lends a fluid grace to Kubo’s story, which weaves seamlessly back and forth between magical realism and pure fantasy. Under his deft touch, feudal Japan comes to life in bold strokes of color and light.
But the stellar achievement of Kubo is the animation itself. Kubo took five years for the studio to perfect; animators and sculptors essentially handcrafted the film’s universe from scratch. Featuring intricate set design and a coterie of puppets, including the largest stop-motion puppet ever built, and a mix of old and new technology, Kubo feels vivid and alive. Shadows have teeth and pulse with raw danger. The gilded armor Kubo seeks sparkles and glitters like jewelry you could touch. An underwater sequence featuring an eerie eyeball garden is as unnerving as it is rich with beauty.
Kubo, perhaps more than any other animated film in the Western canon, has infused emotion into the animation itself. The yearning, the desire for connection, that drives Kubo on his journey is almost palpable in the somber, gorgeous sweep of deep hues that cover his village during the annual lighting of the floating lanterns, a real ceremony for the dead still practiced today in Japan.
Dario Marianelli’s lavish, light score echoes the emotive properties of the art, doing its best to channel the refined aesthetic of Hayao Miyazaki’s longtime collaborator, composer Joe Hisaishi, without ever losing the dynamic, lively sensibility of a Kurosawa samurai epic.
Knight has called Kubo a "Kurosawa myth in miniature," and there’s hardly a better way to describe how the film invokes heroic samurai tales of yore, even as it leaves you wondering what real truths lie behind Kubo’s quest. In this film, it’s easier to make origami folding paper take flight, easier to conquer a terrifying giant, than it is to make sense of familial loss and dysfunction.
In its quieter moments, Kubo owes almost as much to legendary Japanese director Yasujirō Ozu, whose postwar anxieties expressed themselves through the silences that exist between mother and son, father and daughter. Kubo’s lush silences, too, often speak louder than its script.
However, it’s difficult to ignore the fact that the primary creative team around Kubo isn’t Japanese. This is partly because the story itself feels fundamentally driven by Kurosawa’s own cultural borrowing of shoot-'em-up Westerns for its plot conflicts and character dynamics.
It’s also because the main voice cast consists mostly of famed white celebrities; the fourth-wall-breaking interjection of George Takei’s most famous catchphrase mostly just serves to distract from the story and highlight what small roles he and the other Japanese actors in the cast have.
This is a shame, not only because of the missed opportunity for a more authentic voice cast but because the film’s characterizations, in comparison to the sumptuous artistry of the rest of its elements, are Kubo’s weakest point.
We know almost as little about Kubo and his family at the end of our journey as we did when we started. Kubo’s mother is wholly defined through her relationship to each of the men in her life, while her two terrifying sisters are essentially puppets for their father’s will. Kubo himself is as much a typical boy as you could expect from a paper-bending, magical lute–playing genius — but we’re never really sure, in the end, how he’s grown from his adventure.
Of course, Kubo and the Two Strings is beautiful enough, and the story compelling enough, that such complaints feel like quibbling. Laika has once again set a new standard for animation, particularly for the blending of CGI and more traditional stop-motion animated effects. The result is a sumptuous array of visual delights, enough to do justice to traditional tales of knights in shining armor, runaway princesses, lost boys, and talking monkeys.
Whether or not you leave the theater believing in Kubo’s story, you’ll surely wind up believing, as Kubo does, that a world without myriad stories — not to mention a world without myriad animation styles — is no world to live in at all.



Help us celebrate nine years of Vox

      Since Vox launched in 2014, our audience has supported our mission in so many meaningful ways. More than 80,000 people have responded to requests to help with our reporting. Countless teachers have told us about how they’re using our work in their classroom. And in the three years since we launched the Vox Contributions program, tens of thousands of people have chipped in to help keep our unique work free. We’re committed to keeping our work free for all who need it, because we believe that high-quality explanatory journalism is a public good. We can’t rely on ads alone to do that. Will you help us keep Vox free for the next nine years by making a gift today? 


 






One-Time



Monthly



Annual

 
 





$95/year





$120/year





$250/year





$350/year




Other





$





            Yes, I'll give $120/year



          Yes, I'll give $120/year





                We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and
              

                Google Pay. You can also contribute via
              






 
 
 







    Next Up In
    
        Culture















          Most Read
        







Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP






The case against pet ownership






The ongoing scandal over leaked US intel documents, explained






Why Austin Butler still sounds like Elvis, explained by his own vocal coach






Why all your friends are sending you voice notes
















vox-mark








        Sign up for the
        
          newsletter
        
      
      Future Perfect
    
Each week, we explore unique solutions to some of the world's biggest problems.






Thanks for signing up!
Check your inbox for a welcome email.




Email (required)






Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.


      By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. You can opt out at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
      For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.
    



Subscribe






















The Latest










Why the workplace is a common site of mass shootings


    
      By
      
Li Zhou


















Mifepristone is safe


    
      By
      
Keren Landman


















Why these Democrats are defecting to the GOP


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea

















Play




Why AI doesn’t speak every language


    
      By
      
Phil Edwards


















An assault weapons ban might not end mass shootings. But it would help.


    
      By
      
Nicole Narea


















Tennessee Republicans kicked out Justin Jones for gun control protests. He’s back. 


    
      By
      
Li Zhou
























Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Send Us a Tip
Masthead
About Us
Press Room
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.

Author Login

Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2023 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
      
    













